BOOK ONE : 1805
CHAPTER I
" Well , Prince , so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of the Buonapartes .
But I warn you , if you do n't tell me that this means war , if you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by that Antichrist
- I really believe he is Antichrist - I will have nothing more to do with you and you are no longer my friend , no longer my ' faithful slave , ' as you call yourself !
But how do you do ?
I see I have frightened you - sit down and tell me all the news . "
It was in July , 1805 , and the speaker was the well - known Anna P'avlovna Sch'erer , maid of honor and favorite of the Empress M'arya F"edorovna .
With these words she greeted Prince Vas'ili Kur'agin , a man of high rank and importance , who was the first to arrive at her reception .
Anna P'avlovna had had a cough for some days .
She was , as she said , suffering from la grippe ; grippe being then a new word in St. Petersburg , used only by the elite .
All her invitations without exception , written in French , and delivered by a scarlet - liveried footman that morning , ran as follows :
" Heavens !
what a virulent attack ! "
replied the prince , not in the least disconcerted by this reception .
He had just entered , wearing an embroidered court uniform , knee breeches , and shoes , and had stars on his breast and a serene expression on his flat face .
He spoke in that refined French in which our grandfathers not only spoke but thought , and with the gentle , patronizing intonation natural to a man of importance who had grown old in society and at court .
He went up to Anna P'avlovna , kissed her hand , presenting to her his bald , scented , and shining head , and complacently seated himself on the sofa .
" First of all , dear friend , tell me how you are .
Set your friend 's mind at rest , " said he without altering his tone , beneath the politeness and affected sympathy of which indifference and even irony could be discerned .
" Can one be well while suffering morally ?
Can one be calm in times like these if one has any feeling ? " said Anna P'avlovna .
" You are staying the whole evening , I hope ? "
" And the fete at the English ambassador 's ?
Today is Wednesday .
I must put in an appearance there , " said the prince .
" My daughter is coming for me to take me there . "
" I thought today 's fete had been canceled .
I confess all these festivities and fireworks are becoming wearisome . "
" Do n't tease !
Well , and what has been decided about Novos'iltsev 's dispatch ?
You know everything . "
" What can one say about it ? "
replied the prince in a cold , listless tone .
" What has been decided ?
They have decided that Buonaparte has burnt his boats , and I believe that we are ready to burn ours . "
Prince Vas'ili always spoke languidly , like an actor repeating a stale part .
Anna P'avlovna Sch'erer on the contrary , despite her forty years , overflowed with animation and impulsiveness .
To be an enthusiast had become her social vocation and , sometimes even when she did not feel like it , she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint the expectations of those who knew her .
In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna P'avlovna burst out :
" Oh , do n't speak to me of Austria .
Perhaps I do n't understand things , but Austria never has wished , and does not wish , for war .
She is betraying us !
Russia alone must save Europe .
Our gracious sovereign recognizes his high vocation and will be true to it .
That is the one thing I have faith in !
Our good and wonderful sovereign has to perform the noblest role on earth , and he is so virtuous and noble that God will not forsake him .
He will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of revolution , which has become more terrible than ever in the person of this murderer and villain !
We alone must avenge the blood of the just one ....
Whom , I ask you , can we rely on ? ...
England with her commercial spirit will not and can not understand the Emperor Alexander 's loftiness of soul .
She has refused to evacuate Malta .
She wanted to find , and still seeks , some secret motive in our actions .
What answer did Novos'iltsev get ?
None .
The English have not understood and can not understand the self - abnegation of our Emperor who wants nothing for himself , but only desires the good of mankind .
And what have they promised ?
Nothing !
And what little they have promised they will not perform !
Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte is invincible , and that all Europe is powerless before him ....
And I do n't believe a word that Hardenburg says , or Haugwitz either .
This famous Prussian neutrality is just a trap .
I have faith only in God and the lofty destiny of our adored monarch .
He will save Europe ! "
She suddenly paused , smiling at her own impetuosity .
" I think , " said the prince with a smile , " that if you had been sent instead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the King of Prussia 's consent by assault .
You are so eloquent .
Will you give me a cup of tea ? "
" In a moment .
He is one of the genuine ' emigr'es , the good ones .
And also the Abb'e Morio .
Do you know that profound thinker ?
He has been received by the Emperor .
Had you heard ? "
" I shall be delighted to meet them , " said the prince .
"
The baron by all accounts is a poor creature . "
Prince Vas'ili wished to obtain this post for his son , but others were trying through the Dowager Empress M'arya F"edorovna to secure it for the baron .
Anna P'avlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor anyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or was pleased with .
" Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her sister , " was all she said , in a dry and mournful tone .
As she named the Empress , Anna P'avlovna 's face suddenly assumed an expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with sadness , and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious patroness .
She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke beaucoup d'estime , and again her face clouded over with sadness .
The prince was silent and looked indifferent .
" Now about your family .
Do you know that since your daughter came out everyone has been enraptured by her ?
They say she is amazingly beautiful . "
The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude .
Why has fate given you two such splendid children ?
I do n't speak of Anatole , your youngest .
I do n't like him
, " she added in a tone admitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows . "
Two such charming children .
And really you appreciate them less than anyone , and so you do n't deserve to have them . "
And she smiled her ecstatic smile .
" I ca n't help it , " said the prince .
" Lavater would have said I lack the bump of paternity . "
" Do n't joke ; I mean to have a serious talk with you .
Do you know I am dissatisfied with your younger son ?
Between ourselves " ( and her face assumed its melancholy expression ) , " he was mentioned at Her Majesty 's and you were pitied .... "
The prince answered nothing , but she looked at him significantly , awaiting a reply .
He frowned .
" What would you have me do ? " he said at last .
" You know I did all a father could for their education , and they have both turned out fools .
Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool , but Anatole is an active one .
That is the only difference between them . "
He said this smiling in a way more natural and animated than usual , so that the wrinkles round his mouth very clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant .
" And why are children born to such men as you ?
If you were not a father there would be nothing I could reproach you with , " said Anna P'avlovna , looking up pensively .
" I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that my children are the bane of my life .
It is the cross I have to bear .
That is how I explain it to myself .
It ca n't be helped ! "
He said no more , but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a gesture .
Anna P'avlovna meditated .
" Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole ? " she asked .
" They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking , and though I do n't feel that weakness in myself as yet , I know a little person who is very unhappy with her father .
She is a relation of yours , Princess Mary Bolk'onskaya . "
Prince Vas'ili did not reply , though , with the quickness of memory and perception befitting a man of the world , he indicated by a movement of the head that he was considering this information .
" Do you know , " he said at last , evidently unable to check the sad current of his thoughts , " that Anatole is costing me forty thousand rubles a year ?
And , " he went on after a pause , " what will it be in five years , if he goes on like this ? "
Presently he added : " That 's what we fathers have to put up with ....
Is this princess of yours rich ? "
" Her father is very rich and stingy .
He lives in the country .
He is the well - known Prince Bolk'onski who had to retire from the army under the late Emperor , and was nicknamed ' the King of Prussia . '
He is very clever but eccentric , and a bore .
The poor girl is very unhappy .
She has a brother ; I think you know him , he married Lise Meinen lately .
He is an aide - de - camp of Kut'uzov 's and will be here tonight . "
" Listen , dear Annette , " said the prince , suddenly taking Anna P'avlovna 's hand and for some reason drawing it downwards . "
Arrange that affair for me and I shall always be your most devoted slave - slafe with an f , as a village elder of mine writes in his reports .
She is rich and of good family and that 's all I want . "
" Attendez , " said Anna P'avlovna , reflecting , " I 'll speak to Lise , young Bolk'onski 's wife , this very evening , and perhaps the thing can be arranged .
It shall be on your family 's behalf that I 'll start my apprenticeship as old maid . "
CHAPTER II
Anna P'avlovna 's drawing room was gradually filling .
The highest Petersburg society was assembled there : people differing widely in age and character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged .
Prince Vas'ili 's daughter , the beautiful H'el`ene , came to take her father to the ambassador 's entertainment ; she wore a ball dress and her badge as maid of honor .
The youthful little Princess Bolk'onskaya , known as la femme la plus s'eduisante de P'etersbourg , * was also there .
She had been married during the previous winter , and being pregnant did not go to any large gatherings , but only to small receptions .
Prince Vas'ili 's son , Hippolyte , had come with Mortemart , whom he introduced .
The Abb'e Morio and many others had also come .
* The most fascinating woman in Petersburg .
The aunt spoke to each of them in the same words , about their health and her own , and the health of Her Majesty , " who , thank God , was better today . "
And each visitor , though politeness prevented his showing impatience , left the old woman with a sense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not return to her the whole evening .
The young Princess Bolk'onskaya had brought some work in a gold - embroidered velvet bag .
As is always the case with a thoroughly attractive woman , her defect - the shortness of her upper lip and her half - open mouth - seemed to be her own special and peculiar form of beauty .
Everyone brightened at the sight of this pretty young woman , so soon to become a mother , so full of life and health , and carrying her burden so lightly .
All who talked to her , and at each word saw her bright smile and the constant gleam of her white teeth , thought that they were in a specially amiable mood that day .
" I have brought my work , " said she in French , displaying her bag and addressing all present .
"
Mind , Annette
, I hope you have not played a wicked trick on me , " she added , turning to her hostess .
" You wrote that it was to be quite a small reception , and just see how badly I am dressed . "
And she spread out her arms to show her short - waisted , lace - trimmed , dainty gray dress , girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast .
" Soyez tranquille , Lise , you will always be prettier than anyone else , " replied Anna P'avlovna .
" You know , " said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in French , turning to a general , " my husband is deserting me ?
He is going to get himself killed .
Tell me what this wretched war is for ? "
she added , addressing Prince Vas'ili , and without waiting for an answer she turned to speak to his daughter , the beautiful H'el`ene .
" What a delightful woman this little princess is ! " said Prince Vas'ili to Anna P'avlovna .
This stout young man was an illegitimate son of Count Bez'ukhov , a well - known grandee of Catherine 's time who now lay dying in Moscow .
The young man had not yet entered either the military or civil service , as he had only just returned from abroad where he had been educated , and this was his first appearance in society .
Anna P'avlovna greeted him with the nod she accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room .
" It is very good of you , Monsieur Pierre , to come and visit a poor invalid , " said Anna P'avlovna , exchanging an alarmed glance with her aunt as she conducted him to her .
Pierre murmured something unintelligible , and continued to look round as if in search of something .
On his way to the aunt he bowed to the little princess with a pleased smile , as to an intimate acquaintance .
Anna P'avlovna 's alarm was justified , for Pierre turned away from the aunt without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty 's health .
Anna P'avlovna in dismay detained him with the words : " Do you know the Abb'e Morio ?
He is a most interesting man . "
" Yes , I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace , and it is very interesting but hardly feasible . "
" You think so ? " rejoined Anna P'avlovna in order to say something and get away to attend to her duties as hostess .
But Pierre now committed a reverse act of impoliteness .
First he had left a lady before she had finished speaking to him , and now he continued to speak to another who wished to get away .
With his head bent , and his big feet spread apart , he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abb'e 's plan chimerical .
" We will talk of it later , " said Anna P'avlovna with a smile .
But amid these cares her anxiety about Pierre was evident .
She kept an anxious watch on him when he approached the group round Mortemart to listen to what was being said there , and again when he passed to another group whose center was the abb'e .
Pierre had been educated abroad , and this reception at Anna P'avlovna 's was the first he had attended in Russia .
Seeing the self - confident and refined expression on the faces of those present he was always expecting to hear something very profound .
At last he came up to Morio .
Here the conversation seemed interesting and he stood waiting for an opportunity to express his own views , as young people are fond of doing .
CHAPTER III
Anna P'avlovna 's reception was in full swing .
The spindles hummed steadily and ceaselessly on all sides .
With the exception of the aunt , beside whom sat only one elderly lady , who with her thin careworn face was rather out of place in this brilliant society , the whole company had settled into three groups .
One , chiefly masculine , had formed round the abb'e .
Another , of young people , was grouped round
the beautiful Princess H'el`ene , Prince Vas'ili 's daughter , and the little Princess Bolk'onskaya , very pretty and rosy , though rather too plump for her age .
The third group was gathered round Mortemart and Anna P'avlovna .
Anna P'avlovna was obviously serving him up as a treat to her guests .
The group about Mortemart immediately began discussing the murder of the Duc d'Enghien .
The vicomte said that the Duc d'Enghien had perished by his own magnanimity , and that there were particular reasons for Buonaparte 's hatred of him .
" Ah , yes !
The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness to comply .
Anna P'avlovna arranged a group round him , inviting everyone to listen to his tale .
" The vicomte knew the duc personally , " whispered Anna P'avlovna to one of the guests . "
The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur , " said she to another .
The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile .
" Come over here , H'el`ene , dear , " said Anna P'avlovna to the beautiful young princess who was sitting some way off , the center of another group .
The princess smiled .
She rose with the same unchanging smile with which she had first entered the room - the smile of a perfectly beautiful woman .
H'el`ene was so lovely that not only did she not show any trace of coquetry , but on the contrary she even appeared shy of her unquestionable and all too victorious beauty .
She seemed to wish , but to be unable , to diminish its effect .
" Madame , I doubt my ability before such an audience , " said he , smilingly inclining his head .
The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considered a reply unnecessary .
She smilingly waited .
The little princess had also left the tea table and followed H'el`ene .
" Wait a moment , I 'll get my work ....
Now then , what are you thinking of ?
" she went on , turning to Prince Hippolyte . "
Fetch me my workbag . "
There was a general movement as the princess , smiling and talking merrily to everyone at once , sat down and gaily arranged herself in her seat .
" Now I am all right , " she said , and asking the vicomte to begin , she took up her work .
Prince Hippolyte , having brought the workbag , joined the circle and moving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her .
Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary resemblance to his beautiful sister , but yet more by the fact that in spite of this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly .
His eyes , nose , and mouth all seemed puckered into a vacant , wearied grimace , and his arms and legs always fell into unnatural positions .
" It 's not going to be a ghost story ? " said he , sitting down beside the princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette , as if without this instrument he could not begin to speak .
" Why no , my dear fellow , " said the astonished narrator , shrugging his shoulders .
" Because I hate ghost stories , " said Prince Hippolyte in a tone which showed that he only understood the meaning of his words after he had uttered them .
He spoke with such self - confidence that his hearers could not be sure whether what he said was very witty or very stupid .
He was dressed in a dark - green dress coat , knee breeches of the color of cuisse de nymphe effray'ee , as he called it , shoes , and silk stockings .
The vicomte told his tale very neatly .
The latter spared him , and this magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid by death .
The story was very pretty and interesting , especially at the point where the rivals suddenly recognized one another ; and the ladies looked agitated .
" Charming ! " said Anna P'avlovna with an inquiring glance at the little princess .
" Charming ! " whispered the little princess , sticking the needle into her work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story prevented her from going on with it .
Pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abb'e about the balance of power , and the latter , evidently interested by the young man 's simple - minded eagerness , was explaining his pet theory .
Both were talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally , which was why Anna P'avlovna disapproved .
" The means are ... the balance of power in Europe and the rights of the people , " the abb'e was saying .
" But how are you to get that balance ? "
Pierre was beginning .
At that moment Anna P'avlovna came up and , looking severely at Pierre , asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate .
The Italian 's face instantly changed and assumed an offensively affected , sugary expression , evidently habitual to him when conversing with women .
Not letting the abb'e and Pierre escape , Anna P'avlovna , the more conveniently to keep them under observation , brought them into the larger circle .
CHAPTER IV
Just then another visitor entered the drawing room : Prince Andrew Bolk'onski , the little princess ' husband .
He was a very handsome young man , of medium height , with firm , clearcut features .
Everything about him , from his weary , bored expression to his quiet , measured step , offered a most striking contrast to his quiet , little wife .
It was evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing room , but had found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen to them .
And among all these faces that he found so tedious , none seemed to bore him so much as that of his pretty wife .
He turned away from her with a grimace that distorted his handsome face , kissed Anna P'avlovna 's hand , and screwing up his eyes scanned the whole company .
" You are off to the war , Prince ? " said Anna P'avlovna .
" General Kut'uzov , " said Bolk'onski , speaking French and stressing the last syllable of the general 's name like a Frenchman , " has been pleased to take me as an aide - de - camp .... "
"
And Lise , your wife ? "
" She will go to the country . "
" Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife ? "
Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away .
Pierre , who from the moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad , affectionate eyes , now came up and took his arm .
Before he looked round Prince Andrew frowned again , expressing his annoyance with whoever was touching his arm , but when he saw Pierre 's beaming face he gave him an unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile .
" There now ! ...
So you , too , are in the great world ? "
said he to Pierre .
" I knew you would be here , " replied Pierre .
" I will come to supper with you .
May I ?
" he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the vicomte who was continuing his story .
" No , impossible ! " said Prince Andrew , laughing and pressing Pierre 's hand to show that there was no need to ask the question .
He wished to say something more , but at that moment Prince Vas'ili and his daughter got up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass .
" You must excuse me , dear Vicomte , " said Prince Vas'ili to the Frenchman , holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent his rising .
" This unfortunate fete at the ambassador 's deprives me of a pleasure , and obliges me to interrupt you .
I am very sorry to leave your enchanting party , " said he , turning to Anna P'avlovna .
His daughter , Princess H'el`ene , passed between the chairs , lightly holding up the folds of her dress , and the smile shone still more radiantly on her beautiful face .
Pierre gazed at her with rapturous , almost frightened , eyes as she passed him .
" Very lovely , " said Prince Andrew .
" Very , " said Pierre .
In passing Prince Vas'ili seized Pierre 's hand and said to Anna P'avlovna : " Educate this bear for me !
He has been staying with me a whole month and this is the first time I have seen him in society .
Nothing is so necessary for a young man as the society of clever women . "
Anna P'avlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand .
She knew his father to be a connection of Prince Vas'ili 's .
The elderly lady who had been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince Vas'ili in the anteroom .
All the affectation of interest she had assumed had left her kindly and tear - worn face and it now expressed only anxiety and fear .
" How about my son Bor'is , Prince ? " said she , hurrying after him into the anteroom .
" I ca n't remain any longer in Petersburg .
Tell me what news I may take back to my poor boy . "
Although Prince Vas'ili listened reluctantly and not very politely to the elderly lady , even betraying some impatience , she gave him an ingratiating and appealing smile , and took his hand that he might not go away .
" What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor , and then he would be transferred to the Guards at once ? " said she .
" Believe me , Princess , I am ready to do all I can , " answered Prince Vas'ili , " but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor .
I should advise you to appeal to Rumy'antsev through Prince Gol'itsyn .
That would be the best way . "
The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetsk'aya , belonging to one of the best families in Russia , but she was poor , and having long been out of society had lost her former influential connections .
She had now come to Petersburg to procure an appointment in the Guards for her only son .
It was , in fact , solely to meet Prince Vas'ili that she had obtained an invitation to Anna P'avlovna 's reception and had sat listening to the vicomte 's story .
Prince Vas'ili 's words frightened her , an embittered look clouded her once handsome face , but only for a moment ; then she smiled again and clutched Prince Vas'ili 's arm more tightly .
" Listen to me , Prince , " said she .
" I have never yet asked you for anything
and I never will again , nor have I ever reminded you of my father 's friendship for you ;
but now I entreat you for God 's sake to do this for my son - and I shall always regard you as a benefactor , " she added hurriedly . "
No , do n't be angry , but promise !
I have asked Gol'itsyn and he has refused .
Be the kindhearted man you always were , " she said , trying to smile though tears were in her eyes .
" Papa , we shall be late , " said Princess H'el`ene , turning her beautiful head and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she stood waiting by the door .
Influence in society , however , is a capital which has to be economized if it is to last .
Prince Vas'ili knew this , and having once realized that if he asked on behalf of all who begged of him , he would soon be unable to ask for himself , he became chary of using his influence .
But in Princess Drubetsk'aya 's case he felt , after her second appeal , something like qualms of conscience .
She had reminded him of what was quite true ; he had been indebted to her father for the first steps in his career .
This last consideration moved him .
Here is my hand on it .
Are you satisfied ? "
" My dear benefactor !
This is what I expected from you - I knew your kindness ! "
He turned to go .
" Wait - just a word !
When he has been transferred to the Guards ... " she faltered .
" You are on good terms with Michael Ilari'onovich Kut'uzov ... recommend Bor'is to him as adjutant !
Then I shall be at rest , and then ... "
Prince Vas'ili smiled .
" No , I wo n't promise that .
You do n't know how Kut'uzov is pestered since his appointment as Commander in Chief .
He told me himself that all the Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as adjutants . "
" No , but do promise !
I wo n't let you go !
My dear benefactor ... "
" Papa , " said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before , " we shall be late . "
" Well , au revoir !
Good - by !
You hear her ? "
" Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor ? "
" Certainly ; but about Kut'uzov , I do n't promise . "
Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed all the old feminine arts .
But as soon as the prince had gone her face resumed its former cold , artificial expression .
She returned to the group where the vicomte was still talking , and again pretended to listen , while waiting till it would be time to leave .
Her task was accomplished .
CHAPTER V
Adorable !
It is enough to make one 's head whirl !
It is as if the whole world had gone crazy . "
Prince Andrew looked Anna P'avlovna straight in the face with a sarcastic smile .
" ' Dieu me la donne , gare ` a qui la touche ! ''
* They say he was very fine when he said that , " he remarked , repeating the words in Italian : " ' Dio mi l'ha dato .
Guai a chi la tocchi ! ''
* God has given it to me , let him who touches it beware !
" I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run over , " Anna P'avlovna continued .
" The sovereigns will not be able to endure this man who is a menace to everything . "
" The sovereigns ?
I do not speak of Russia , " said the vicomte , polite but hopeless : " The sovereigns , madame ...
What have they done for Louis XVII , for the Queen , or for Madame Elizabeth ?
Nothing ! "
and he became more animated . "
And believe me , they are reaping the reward of their betrayal of the Bourbon cause .
The sovereigns !
Why , they are sending ambassadors to compliment the usurper . "
And sighing disdainfully , he again changed his position .
He explained this to her with as much gravity as if she had asked him to do it .
" B^aton de gueules , engr^el'e de gueules d'azur - maison Cond'e , " said he .
The princess listened , smiling .
By intrigues , violence , exile , and executions , French society - I mean good French society - will have been forever destroyed , and then .... "
He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands .
Pierre wished to make a remark , for the conversation interested him , but Anna P'avlovna , who had him under observation , interrupted :
" That is doubtful , " said Prince Andrew .
" Monsieur le Vicomte quite rightly supposes that matters have already gone too far .
I think it will be difficult to return to the old regime . "
" From what I have heard , " said Pierre , blushing and breaking into the conversation , " almost all the aristocracy has already gone over to Bonaparte 's side . "
" It is the Buonapartists who say that , " replied the vicomte without looking at Pierre .
" At the present time it is difficult to know the real state of French public opinion . "
" Bonaparte has said so , " remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic smile .
It was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming his remarks at him , though without looking at him .
" ' I showed them the path to glory , but they did not follow it , ' " Prince Andrew continued after a short silence , again quoting Napoleon 's words .
" ' I opened my antechambers and they crowded in . '
I do not know how far he was justified in saying so . "
" Not in the least , " replied the vicomte . "
After the murder of the duc even the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero .
" Dieu !
Mon Dieu ! "
muttered Anna P'avlovna in a terrified whisper .
" What , Monsieur Pierre ...
Do you consider that assassination shows greatness of soul ? " said the little princess , smiling and drawing her work nearer to her .
" Oh ! Oh ! " exclaimed several voices .
" Capital ! " said Prince Hippolyte in English , and began slapping his knee with the palm of his hand .
The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders .
Pierre looked solemnly at his audience over his spectacles and continued .
" Wo n't you come over to the other table ? " suggested Anna P'avlovna .
But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her .
" Yes , if having obtained power , without availing himself of it to commit murder he had restored it to the rightful king , I should have called him a great man , " remarked the vicomte .
" He could not do that .
The people only gave him power that he might rid them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man .
The Revolution was a grand thing ! "
continued Monsieur Pierre , betraying by this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and his wish to express all that was in his mind .
" What ?
Revolution and regicide a grand thing ? ...
Well , after that ...
But wo n't you come to this other table ?
" repeated Anna P'avlovna .
" Rousseau 's Contrat Social , " said the vicomte with a tolerant smile .
" I am not speaking of regicide , I am speaking about ideas . "
" Yes : ideas of robbery , murder , and regicide , " again interjected an ironical voice .
" Those were extremes , no doubt , but they are not what is most important .
What is important are the rights of man , emancipation from prejudices , and equality of citizenship , and all these ideas Napoleon has retained in full force . "
" Liberty and equality , " said the vicomte contemptuously , as if at last deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words were , " high - sounding words which have long been discredited .
Who does not love liberty and equality ?
Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality .
Have people since the Revolution become happier ?
On the contrary .
We wanted liberty , but Buonaparte has destroyed it . "
Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to the vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess .
In the first moment of Pierre 's outburst Anna P'avlovna , despite her social experience , was horror - struck .
" But , my dear Monsieur Pierre , " said she , " how do you explain the fact of a great man executing a duc - or even an ordinary man who - is innocent and untried ? "
" I should like , " said the vicomte , " to ask how monsieur explains the 18th Brumaire ; was not that an imposture ?
It was a swindle , and not at all like the conduct of a great man ! "
" And the prisoners he killed in Africa ?
That was horrible ! "
said the little princess , shrugging her shoulders .
" He 's a low fellow , say what you will , " remarked Prince Hippolyte .
Pierre , not knowing whom to answer , looked at them all and smiled .
His smile was unlike the half - smile of other people .
When he smiled , his grave , even rather gloomy , look was instantaneously replaced by another - a childlike , kindly , even rather silly look , which seemed to ask forgiveness .
The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that this young Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested .
All were silent .
" How do you expect him to answer you all at once ? " said Prince Andrew .
" Besides , in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish between his acts as a private person , as a general , and as an emperor .
So it seems to me . "
" Yes , yes , of course ! "
Pierre chimed in , pleased at the arrival of this reinforcement .
Prince Andrew , who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of Pierre 's remarks , rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time to go .
Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend , and asking them all to be seated began :
" I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to it .
Excuse me , Vicomte -
I must tell it in Russian or the point will be lost .... "
And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story in such Russian as a Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia .
Everyone waited , so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their attention to his story .
" There is in Moscow a lady , une dame , and she is very stingy .
She must have two footmen behind her carriage , and very big ones .
That was her taste .
And she had a lady 's maid , also big .
She said .... "
Here Prince Hippolyte paused , evidently collecting his ideas with difficulty .
" She said ....
Oh yes !
She said , ' Girl , ' to the maid , ' put on a livery , get up behind the carriage , and come with me while I make some calls . ' "
Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before his audience , which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator .
Several persons , among them the elderly lady and Anna P'avlovna , did however smile .
" She went .
Suddenly there was a great wind .
The girl lost her hat and her long hair came down .... "
Here he could contain himself no longer and went on , between gasps of laughter : " And the whole world knew .... "
And so the anecdote ended .
After the anecdote the conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last and next balls , about theatricals , and who would meet whom , and when and where .
CHAPTER VI
Having thanked Anna P'avlovna for her charming soiree , the guests began to take their leave .
Pierre was ungainly .
Besides this he was absent - minded .
When he rose to go , he took up instead of his own , the general 's three - cornered hat , and held it , pulling at the plume , till the general asked him to restore it .
All his absent - mindedness and inability to enter a room and converse in it was , however , redeemed by his kindly , simple , and modest expression .
And everyone , including Anna P'avlovna , felt this .
Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty , pregnant princess , and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass .
" Go in , Annette , or you will catch cold , " said the little princess , taking leave of Anna P'avlovna .
" It is settled , " she added in a low voice .
Anna P'avlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match she contemplated between Anatole and the little princess ' sister - in - law .
" I rely on you , my dear , " said Anna P'avlovna , also in a low tone .
" Write to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter .
Au revoir ! "
-and she left the hall .
Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and , bending his face close to her , began to whisper something .
Two footmen , the princess ' and his own , stood holding a shawl and a cloak , waiting for the conversation to finish .
They listened to the French sentences which to them were meaningless , with an air of understanding but not wishing to appear to do so .
The princess as usual spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh .
" I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador 's , " said Prince Hippolyte " -so dull- .
It has been a delightful evening , has it not ?
Delightful ! "
" They say the ball will be very good , " replied the princess , drawing up her downy little lip .
" All the pretty women in society will be there . "
Either from awkwardness or intentionally ( no one could have said which ) after the shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time , as though embracing her .
Still smiling , she gracefully moved away , turning and glancing at her husband .
Prince Andrew 's eyes were closed , so weary and sleepy did he seem .
" Are you ready ? "
he asked his wife , looking past her .
" Princesse , au revoir , " cried he , stumbling with his tongue as well as with his feet .
The princess , picking up her dress , was taking her seat in the dark carriage , her husband was adjusting his saber ; Prince Hippolyte , under pretense of helping , was in everyone 's way .
" Allow me , sir , " said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold , disagreeable tone to Prince Hippolyte who was blocking his path .
" I am expecting you , Pierre , " said the same voice , but gently and affectionately .
The postilion started , the carriage wheels rattled .
Prince Hippolyte laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte whom he had promised to take home .
Hippolyte burst out laughing .
" Do you know , you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs , " continued the vicomte .
" I pity the poor husband , that little officer who gives himself the airs of a monarch . "
Hippolyte spluttered again , and amid his laughter said , " And you were saying that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French ?
One has to know how to deal with them . "
" What have you done to Mlle Sch'erer ?
She will be quite ill now , " said Prince Andrew , as he entered the study , rubbing his small white hands .
Pierre turned his whole body , making the sofa creak .
He lifted his eager face to Prince Andrew , smiled , and waved his hand .
" That abb'e is very interesting but he does not see the thing in the right light ....
In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but - I do not know how to express it ... not by a balance of political power .... "
It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstract conversation .
" One ca n't everywhere say all one thinks , mon cher .
Well , have you at last decided on anything ?
Are you going to be a guardsman or a diplomatist ?
" asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence .
Pierre sat up on the sofa , with his legs tucked under him .
" Really , I do n't yet know .
I do n't like either the one or the other . "
" But you must decide on something !
Your father expects it . "
Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abb'e as tutor , and had remained away till he was twenty .
When he returned to Moscow his father dismissed the abb'e and said to the young man , " Now go to Petersburg , look round , and choose your profession .
I will agree to anything .
Here is a letter to Prince Vas'ili , and here is money .
Write to me all about it , and I will help you in everything . "
Pierre had already been choosing a career for three months , and had not decided on anything .
It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was speaking .
Pierre rubbed his forehead .
" But he must be a Freemason , " said he , referring to the abb'e whom he had met that evening .
" That is all nonsense . "
Prince Andrew again interrupted him , " let us talk business .
Have you been to the Horse Guards ? "
" No , I have not ; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted to tell you .
There is a war now against Napoleon .
If it were a war for freedom I could understand it and should be the first to enter the army ; but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world is not right . "
Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre 's childish words .
" If no one fought except on his own conviction , there would be no wars , " he said .
" And that would be splendid , " said Pierre .
Prince Andrew smiled ironically .
" Very likely it would be splendid , but it will never come about .... "
" Well , why are you going to the war ? " asked Pierre .
" What for ?
I do n't know .
I must .
Besides that I am going .... "
He paused .
" I am going because the life I am leading here does not suit me ! "
CHAPTER VII
The rustle of a woman 's dress was heard in the next room .
Prince Andrew shook himself as if waking up , and his face assumed the look it had had in Anna P'avlovna 's drawing room .
Pierre removed his feet from the sofa .
The princess came in .
She had changed her gown for a house dress as fresh and elegant as the other .
Prince Andrew rose and politely placed a chair for her .
" How is it , " she began , as usual in French , settling down briskly and fussily in the easy chair , " how is it
Annette never got married ?
How stupid you men all are not to have married her !
Excuse me for saying so , but you have no sense about women .
What an argumentative fellow you are , Monsieur Pierre ! "
" And I am still arguing with your husband .
I ca n't understand why he wants to go to the war , " replied Pierre , addressing the princess with none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in their intercourse with young women .
The princess started .
Evidently Pierre 's words touched her to the quick .
" Ah , that is just what I tell him ! " said she .
" I do n't understand it ; I do n't in the least understand why men ca n't live without wars .
How is it that we women do n't want anything of the kind , do n't need it ?
Now you shall judge between us .
I always tell him : Here he is Uncle 's aide - de - camp , a most brilliant position .
He is so well known , so much appreciated by everyone .
The other day at the Apr'aksins
' I heard a lady asking , ' Is that the famous Prince Andrew ? '
I did indeed .
" She laughed . "
He is so well received everywhere .
He might easily become aide - de - camp to the Emperor .
You know the Emperor spoke to him most graciously .
Annette and I were speaking of how to arrange it .
What do you think ? "
Pierre looked at his friend and , noticing that he did not like the conversation , gave no reply .
" When are you starting ? " he asked .
" Oh , do n't speak of his going , do n't !
Today when I remembered that all these delightful associations must be broken off ...
and then you know , Andr'e ... "
( she looked significantly at her husband ) "
I 'm afraid , I 'm afraid !
" she whispered , and a shudder ran down her back .
Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides Pierre and himself was in the room , and addressed her in a tone of frigid politeness .
" What is it you are afraid of , Lise ?
I do n't understand , " said he .
" There , what egotists men all are : all , all egotists !
Just for a whim of his own , goodness only knows why , he leaves me and locks me up alone in the country . "
" With my father and sister , remember , " said Prince Andrew gently .
" Alone all the same , without my friends ....
And he expects me not to be afraid . "
Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up , giving her not a joyful , but an animal , squirrel - like expression .
She paused as if she felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre , though the gist of the matter lay in that .
" I still ca n't understand what you are afraid of , " said Prince Andrew slowly , not taking his eyes off his wife .
The princess blushed , and raised her arms with a gesture of despair .
" No , Andrew , I must say you have changed .
Oh , how you have .... "
" Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier , " said Prince Andrew .
" You had better go . "
The princess said nothing , but suddenly her short downy lip quivered .
Prince Andrew rose , shrugged his shoulders , and walked about the room .
Pierre looked over his spectacles with na"ive surprise , now at him and now at her , moved as if about to rise too , but changed his mind .
" Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here ? " exclaimed the little princess suddenly , her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful grimace .
" I have long wanted to ask you , Andrew , why you have changed so to me ?
What have I done to you ?
You are going to the war and have no pity for me .
Why is it ? "
" Lise ! " was all Prince Andrew said .
But that one word expressed an entreaty , a threat , and above all conviction that she would herself regret her words .
But she went on hurriedly :
" You treat me like an invalid or a child .
I see it all !
Did you behave like that six months ago ? "
" Lise , I beg you to desist , " said Prince Andrew still more emphatically .
Pierre , who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to all this , rose and approached the princess .
He seemed unable to bear the sight of tears and was ready to cry himself .
" Calm yourself , Princess !
It seems so to you because ....
I assure you I myself have experienced ... and
so ... because ...
No , excuse me !
An outsider is out of place here ....
No , do n't distress yourself ....
Good - by ! "
Prince Andrew caught him by the hand .
" No , wait , Pierre !
The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of the pleasure of spending the evening with you . "
" No , he thinks only of himself , " muttered the princess without restraining her angry tears .
" Lise ! " said Prince Andrew dryly , raising his voice to the pitch which indicates that patience is exhausted .
Suddenly the angry , squirrel - like expression of the princess ' pretty face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear .
Her beautiful eyes glanced askance at her husband 's face , and her own assumed the timid , deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags its drooping tail .
" Mon Dieu , mon Dieu ! " she muttered , and lifting her dress with one hand she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead .
" Good night , Lise , " said he , rising and courteously kissing her hand as he would have done to a stranger .
CHAPTER VIII
The friends were silent .
Neither cared to begin talking .
Pierre continually glanced at Prince Andrew ; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead with his small hand .
" Let us go and have supper , " he said with a sigh , going to the door .
They entered the elegant , newly decorated , and luxurious dining room .
Everything from the table napkins to the silver , china , and glass bore that imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married .
" Never , never marry , my dear fellow !
Marry when you are old and good for nothing - or all that is good and noble in you will be lost .
It will all be wasted on trifles .
Yes !
Yes !
Yes !
Do n't look at me with such surprise .
But what 's the good ? ...
" and he waved his arm .
Pierre took off his spectacles , which made his face seem different and the good - natured expression still more apparent , and gazed at his friend in amazement .
You are the first and only one to whom I mention this , because I like you . "
As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolk'onski who had lolled in Anna P'avlovna 's easy chairs and with half - closed eyes had uttered French phrases between his teeth .
Every muscle of his thin face was now quivering with nervous excitement ; his eyes , in which the fire of life had seemed extinguished , now flashed with brilliant light .
It was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary times , the more impassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid irritation .
" You do n't understand why I say this , " he continued , " but it is the whole story of life .
You talk of Bonaparte and his career , " said he ( though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte ) , " but Bonaparte when he worked went step by step toward his goal .
He was free , he had nothing but his aim to consider , and he reached it .
But tie yourself up with a woman and , like a chained convict , you lose all freedom !
And all you have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and torments you with regret .
Drawing rooms , gossip , balls , vanity , and triviality - these are the enchanted circle I can not escape from .
I am now going to the war , the greatest war there ever was , and I know nothing and am fit for nothing .
I am very amiable and have a caustic wit , " continued Prince Andrew , " and at Anna P'avlovna 's they listen to me .
And that stupid set without whom my wife can not exist , and those women ....
If you only knew what those society women are , and women in general !
My father is right .
Selfish , vain , stupid , trivial in everything -
that 's what women are when you see them in their true colors !
When you meet them in society it seems as if there were something in them , but there 's nothing , nothing , nothing !
No , do n't marry , my dear fellow ; do n't marry ! " concluded Prince Andrew .
" It seems funny to me , " said Pierre , " that you , you should consider yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life .
You have everything before you , everything .
And you .... "
He did not finish his sentence , but his tone showed how highly he thought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future .
" How can he talk like that ? " thought Pierre .
He considered his friend a model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the highest degree just the very qualities Pierre lacked , and which might be best described as strength of will .
And if Pierre was often struck by Andrew 's lack of capacity for philosophical meditation ( to which he himself was particularly addicted ) , he regarded even this not as a defect but as a sign of strength .
Even in the best , most friendly and simplest relations of life , praise and commendation are essential , just as grease is necessary to wheels that they may run smoothly .
" My part is played out , " said Prince Andrew .
" What 's the use of talking about me ?
Let us talk about you , " he added after a silence , smiling at his reassuring thoughts .
That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre 's face .
" But what is there to say about me ? " said Pierre , his face relaxing into a careless , merry smile .
" What am I ?
An illegitimate son ! "
He suddenly blushed crimson , and it was plain that he had made a great effort to say this . "
Without a name and without means ...
And it really ... "
But he did not say what " it really " was . "
For the present I am free and am all right .
Only I have n't the least idea what I am to do ; I wanted to consult you seriously . "
Prince Andrew looked kindly at him , yet his glance - friendly and affectionate as it was - expressed a sense of his own superiority .
" I am fond of you , especially as you are the one live man among our whole set .
Yes , you 're all right !
Choose what you will ; it 's all the same .
You 'll be all right anywhere .
But look here : give up visiting those Kur'agins and leading that sort of life .
It suits you so badly - all this debauchery , dissipation , and the rest of it ! "
" What would you have , my dear fellow ? " answered Pierre , shrugging his shoulders .
" Women , my dear fellow ; women ! "
" I do n't understand it , " replied Prince Andrew .
" Women who are comme il faut , that 's a different matter ; but the Kur'agins ' set of women , ' women and wine ' I do n't understand ! "
Pierre was staying at Prince Vas'ili Kur'agin 's and sharing the dissipated life of his son Anatole , the son whom they were planning to reform by marrying him to Prince Andrew 's sister .
" Do you know ? " said Pierre , as if suddenly struck by a happy thought , " seriously , I have long been thinking of it ....
Leading such a life I ca n't decide or think properly about anything .
One 's head aches , and one spends all one 's money .
He asked me for tonight , but I wo n't go . "
" You give me your word of honor not to go ? "
" On my honor ! "
CHAPTER IX
It was past one o'clock when Pierre left his friend .
It was a cloudless , northern , summer night .
Pierre took an open cab intending to drive straight home .
But the nearer he drew to the house the more he felt the impossibility of going to sleep on such a night .
It was light enough to see a long way in the deserted street and it seemed more like morning or evening than night .
On the way Pierre remembered that Anatole Kur'agin was expecting the usual set for cards that evening , after which there was generally a drinking bout , finishing with visits of a kind Pierre was very fond of .
" I should like to go to Kur'agin 's , " thought he .
But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to go there .
Then , as happens to people of weak character , he desired so passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so accustomed to that he decided to go .
Pierre often indulged in reflections of this sort , nullifying all his decisions and intentions .
He went to Kur'agin 's .
Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards ' barracks , in which Anatole lived , Pierre entered the lighted porch , ascended the stairs , and went in at the open door .
There was no one in the anteroom ; empty bottles , cloaks , and overshoes were lying about ; there was a smell of alcohol , and sounds of voices and shouting in the distance .
Cards and supper were over , but the visitors had not yet dispersed .
Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room , in which were the remains of supper .
A footman , thinking no one saw him , was drinking on the sly what was left in the glasses .
From the third room came sounds of laughter , the shouting of familiar voices , the growling of a bear , and general commotion .
Some eight or nine young men were crowding anxiously round an open window .
Three others were romping with a young bear , one pulling him by the chain and trying to set him at the others .
" I bet a hundred on Stevens ! " shouted one .
" Mind , no holding on ! " cried another .
" I bet on D'olokhov ! " cried a third . "
Kur'agin , you part our hands . "
" There , leave Bruin alone ; here 's a bet on . "
" At one draught , or he loses ! " shouted a fourth .
" Jacob , bring a bottle ! " shouted the host , a tall , handsome fellow who stood in the midst of the group , without a coat , and with his fine linen shirt unfastened in front .
"
Wait a bit , you fellows ....
Here is P'etya !
Good man !
" cried he , addressing Pierre .
Another voice , from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes , particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sober ring , cried from the window : " Come here ; part the bets ! "
This was D'olokhov , an officer of the Sem"enov regiment , a notorious gambler and duelist , who was living with Anatole .
Pierre smiled , looking about him merrily .
" I do n't understand .
What 's it all about ? "
" Wait a bit , he is not drunk yet !
A bottle here , " said Anatole , and taking a glass from the table he went up to Pierre .
" First of all you must drink ! "
Pierre drank one glass after another , looking from under his brows at the tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window , and listening to their chatter .
" Go on , you must drink it all , " said Anatole , giving Pierre the last glass , " or I wo n't let you go ! "
" No , I wo n't , " said Pierre , pushing Anatole aside , and he went up to the window .
D'olokhov was holding the Englishman 's hand and clearly and distinctly repeating the terms of the bet , addressing himself particularly to Anatole and Pierre .
D'olokhov was of medium height , with curly hair and light - blue eyes .
He was about twenty - five .
Like all infantry officers he wore no mustache , so that his mouth , the most striking feature of his face , was clearly seen .
The lines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved .
D'olokhov was a man of small means and no connections .
D'olokhov could play all games and nearly always won .
However much he drank , he never lost his clearheadedness .
Both Kur'agin and D'olokhov were at that time notorious among the rakes and scapegraces of Petersburg .
The bottle of rum was brought .
The window frame which prevented anyone from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen , who were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts of the gentlemen around .
Anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window .
He wanted to smash something .
Pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame , but could not move it .
He smashed a pane .
" You have a try , Hercules , " said he , turning to Pierre .
Pierre seized the crossbeam , tugged , and wrenched the oak frame out with a crash .
" Take it right out , or they 'll think I 'm holding on , " said D'olokhov .
" Is the Englishman bragging ? ...
Eh ?
Is it all right ? " said Anatole .
D'olokhov , the bottle of rum still in his hand , jumped onto the window sill .
" Listen ! "
cried he , standing there and addressing those in the room .
All were silent .
" I bet fifty imperials "- he spoke French that the Englishman might understand him , but he did not speak it very well-"I bet fifty imperials ... or do you wish to make it a hundred
? " added he , addressing the Englishman .
" No , fifty , " replied the latter .
" All right .
Is that right ? "
"
Quite right , " said the Englishman .
Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking him by one of the buttons of his coat and looking down at him - the Englishman was short - began repeating the terms of the wager to him in English .
" Wait ! " cried D'olokhov , hammering with the bottle on the window sill to attract attention . "
Wait a bit , Kur'agin .
Listen !
If anyone else does the same , I will pay him a hundred imperials .
Do you understand ? "
The Englishman nodded , but gave no indication whether he intended to accept this challenge or not .
Anatole did not release him , and though he kept nodding to show that he understood , Anatole went on translating D'olokhov 's words into English .
A thin young lad , an hussar of the Life Guards , who had been losing that evening , climbed on the window sill , leaned over , and looked down .
" Oh !
Oh !
Oh ! "
he muttered , looking down from the window at the stones of the pavement .
" Shut up ! "
cried D'olokhov , pushing him away from the window .
The lad jumped awkwardly back into the room , tripping over his spurs .
Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily , D'olokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and lowered his legs .
Pressing against both sides of the window , he adjusted himself on his seat , lowered his hands , moved a little to the right and then to the left , and took up the bottle .
Anatole brought two candles and placed them on the window sill , though it was already quite light .
D'olokhov 's back in his white shirt , and his curly head , were lit up from both sides .
Everyone crowded to the window , the Englishman in front .
Pierre stood smiling but silent .
One man , older than the others present , suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and wanted to seize hold of D'olokhov 's shirt .
" I say , this is folly !
He 'll be killed , " said this more sensible man .
Anatole stopped him .
" Do n't touch him !
You 'll startle him and then he 'll be killed .
Eh ? ...
What then ? ...
Eh ? "
D'olokhov turned round and , again holding on with both hands , arranged himself on his seat .
" If anyone comes meddling again , " said he , emitting the words separately through his thin compressed lips , " I will throw him down there .
Now then ! "
Saying this he again turned round , dropped his hands , took the bottle and lifted it to his lips , threw back his head , and raised his free hand to balance himself .
One of the footmen who had stooped to pick up some broken glass remained in that position without taking his eyes from the window and from D'olokhov 's back .
Anatole stood erect with staring eyes .
The Englishman looked on sideways , pursing up his lips .
The man who had wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw himself on a sofa with his face to the wall .
Pierre hid his face , from which a faint smile forgot to fade though his features now expressed horror and fear .
All were still .
Pierre took his hands from his eyes .
The bottle was emptying perceptibly and rising still higher and his head tilting yet further back .
" Why is it so long ? "
thought Pierre .
It seemed to him that more than half an hour had elapsed .
Suddenly D'olokhov made a backward movement with his spine , and his arm trembled nervously ; this was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip as he sat on the sloping ledge .
As he began slipping down , his head and arm wavered still more with the strain .
One hand moved as if to clutch the window sill , but refrained from touching it .
Pierre again covered his eyes and thought he would never open them again .
Suddenly he was aware of a stir all around .
He looked up : D'olokhov was standing on the window sill , with a pale but radiant face .
" It 's empty . "
He threw the bottle to the Englishman , who caught it neatly .
D'olokhov jumped down .
He smelt strongly of rum .
" Well done ! ...
Fine fellow ! ...
There 's a bet for you ! ...
Devil take you ! " came from different sides .
The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money .
D'olokhov stood frowning and did not speak .
Pierre jumped upon the window sill .
" Gentlemen , who wishes to bet with me ?
I 'll do the same thing ! "
he suddenly cried . "
Even without a bet , there !
Tell them to bring me a bottle .
I 'll do it ....
Bring a bottle ! "
" Let him do it , let him do it , " said D'olokhov , smiling .
" What next ?
Have you gone mad ? ...
No one would let you ! ...
Why , you go giddy even on a staircase , " exclaimed several voices .
" I 'll drink it !
Let 's have a bottle of rum ! "
shouted Pierre , banging the table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to climb out of the window .
They seized him by his arms ; but he was so strong that everyone who touched him was sent flying .
" No , you 'll never manage him that way , " said Anatole .
"
Wait a bit
and I 'll get round him ....
Listen !
I 'll take your bet tomorrow , but now we are all going to -- 's . "
" Come on then , " cried Pierre . "
Come on ! ...
And we 'll take Bruin with us . "
And he caught the bear , took it in his arms , lifted it from the ground , and began dancing round the room with it .
CHAPTER X
Prince Vas'ili kept the promise he had given to Princess Drubetsk'aya who had spoken to him on behalf of her only son Bor'is on the evening of Anna P'avlovna 's soiree .
The matter was mentioned to the Emperor , an exception made , and Bor'is transferred into the regiment of Sem"enov Guards with the rank of cornet .
He received , however , no appointment to Kut'uzov 's staff despite all Anna Mikh'aylovna 's endeavors and entreaties .
The Guards had already left Petersburg on the tenth of August , and her son , who had remained in Moscow for his equipment , was to join them on the march to Radziv'ilov .
It was St. Natalia 's day and the name day of two of the Rost'ovs - the mother and the youngest daughter -
both named Nataly .
Ever since the morning , carriages with six horses had been coming and going continually , bringing visitors to the Countess Rost'ova 's big house on the Povarsk'aya , so well known to all Moscow .
The countess herself and her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawing room with the visitors who came to congratulate , and who constantly succeeded one another in relays .
The countess was a woman of about forty - five , with a thin Oriental type of face , evidently worn out with childbearing - she had had twelve .
A languor of motion and speech , resulting from weakness , gave her a distinguished air which inspired respect .
Princess Anna Mikh'aylovna Drubetsk'aya , who as a member of the household was also seated in the drawing room , helped to receive and entertain the visitors .
The young people were in one of the inner rooms , not considering it necessary to take part in receiving the visitors .
The count met the guests and saw them off , inviting them all to dinner .
But mind you come to dinner
or I shall be offended , ma ch`ere !
On behalf of the whole family I beg you to come , mon cher ! "
That 's right !
The great thing is the serving , that 's it . "
And with a complacent sigh he would return to the drawing room .
" M'arya Lv'ovna Kar'agina and her daughter ! " announced the countess ' gigantic footman in his bass voice , entering the drawing room .
The countess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold snuffbox with her husband 's portrait on it .
" I 'm quite worn out by these callers .
However , I 'll see her and no more .
She is so affected .
Ask her in , " she said to the footman in a sad voice , as if saying : " Very well , finish me off . "
A tall , stout , and proud - looking woman , with a round - faced smiling daughter , entered the drawing room , their dresses rustling .
" Dear Countess , what an age ...
She has been laid up , poor child ... at the Razum'ovski 's ball ... and Countess Apr'aksina ...
I was so delighted ... " came the sounds of animated feminine voices , interrupting one another and mingling with the rustling of dresses and the scraping of chairs .
Then one of those conversations began which last out until , at the first pause , the guests rise with a rustle of dresses and say , " I am so delighted ...
Mamma 's health ... and Countess Apr'aksina ... " and then , again rustling , pass into the anteroom , put on cloaks or mantles , and drive away .
" I am so sorry for the poor count , " said the visitor .
" He is in such bad health , and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill him ! "
" What is that ? " asked the countess as if she did not know what the visitor alluded to , though she had already heard about the cause of Count Bez'ukhov 's distress some fifteen times .
" That 's what comes of a modern education , " exclaimed the visitor .
" You do n't say so ! " replied the countess .
" He chose his friends badly , " interposed Anna Mikh'aylovna .
"
Prince Vas'ili 's son , he , and a certain D'olokhov have , it is said , been up to heaven only knows what !
And they have had to suffer for it .
D'olokhov has been degraded to the ranks and Bez'ukhov 's son sent back to Moscow .
Anatole Kur'agin 's father managed somehow to get his son 's affair hushed up , but even he was ordered out of Petersburg . "
" But what have they been up to ? " asked the countess .
" They are regular brigands , especially D'olokhov , " replied the visitor .
" He is a son of M'arya Iv'anovna D'olokhova , such a worthy woman , but there , just fancy !
Those three got hold of a bear somewhere , put it in a carriage , and set off with it to visit some actresses !
The police tried to interfere , and what did the young men do ?
They tied a policeman and the bear back to back and put the bear into the Moyka Canal .
And there was the bear swimming about with the policeman on his back ! "
" What a nice figure the policeman must have cut , my dear ! " shouted the count , dying with laughter .
" Oh , how dreadful !
How can you laugh at it , Count ? "
Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing .
" It was all they could do to rescue the poor man , " continued the visitor .
" And to think it is Cyril Vlad'imirovich Bez'ukhov 's son who amuses himself in this sensible manner !
And he was said to be so well educated and clever .
This is all that his foreign education has done for him !
I hope that here in Moscow no one will receive him , in spite of his money .
They wanted to introduce him to me , but I quite declined : I have my daughters to consider . "
" Why do you say this young man is so rich ? " asked the countess , turning away from the girls , who at once assumed an air of inattention . "
His children are all illegitimate .
I think Pierre also is illegitimate . "
The visitor made a gesture with her hand .
" I should think he has a score of them . "
Princess Anna Mikh'aylovna intervened in the conversation , evidently wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in society .
" The fact of the matter is , " said she significantly , and also in a half whisper , " everyone knows Count Cyril 's reputation ....
He has lost count of his children , but this Pierre was his favorite . "
" How handsome the old man still was only a year ago ! " remarked the countess .
" I have never seen a handsomer man . "
" He is very much altered now , " said Anna Mikh'aylovna .
"
Forty thousand serfs and millions of rubles !
I know it all very well for Prince Vas'ili told me himself .
Besides , Cyril Vlad'imirovich is my mother 's second cousin .
He 's also my B'ory 's godfather , " she added , as if she attached no importance at all to the fact .
" Prince Vas'ili arrived in Moscow yesterday .
I hear he has come on some inspection business , " remarked the visitor .
" Yes , but between ourselves , " said the princess , " that is a pretext .
The fact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vlad'imirovich , hearing how ill he is . "
" But do you know , my dear , that was a capital joke , " said the count ; and seeing that the elder visitor was not listening , he turned to the young ladies .
" I can just imagine what a funny figure that policeman cut ! "
And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman , his portly form again shook with a deep ringing laugh , the laugh of one who always eats well and , in particular , drinks well . "
So do come and dine with us ! "
he said .
CHAPTER XI
Silence ensued .
The countess looked at her callers , smiling affably , but not concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they now rose and took their leave .
It was evident that she had not intended her flight to bring her so far .
Behind her in the doorway appeared a student with a crimson coat collar , an officer of the Guards , a girl of fifteen , and a plump rosy - faced boy in a short jacket .
The count jumped up and , swaying from side to side , spread his arms wide and threw them round the little girl who had run in .
" Ah , here she is ! "
he exclaimed laughing .
" My pet , whose name day it is .
My dear pet ! "
" Ma ch`ere , there is a time for everything , " said the countess with feigned severity .
" You spoil her , Ily'a , " she added , turning to her husband .
" How do you do , my dear ?
I wish you many happy returns of your name day , " said the visitor .
" What a charming child , " she added , addressing the mother .
Escaping from her father she ran to hide her flushed face in the lace of her mother 's mantilla - not paying the least attention to her severe remark - and began to laugh .
She laughed , and in fragmentary sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced from the folds of her frock .
" Do you see ? ...
My doll ...
Mimi ...
You see ... " was all Nat'asha managed to utter ( to her everything seemed funny ) .
She leaned against her mother and burst into such a loud , ringing fit of laughter that even the prim visitor could not help joining in .
Nat'asha , raising her face for a moment from her mother 's mantilla , glanced up at her through tears of laughter , and again hid her face .
The visitor , compelled to look on at this family scene , thought it necessary to take some part in it .
" Tell me , my dear , " said she to Nat'asha , " is Mimi a relation of yours ?
A daughter , I suppose ? "
Nat'asha did not like the visitor 's tone of condescension to childish things .
She did not reply , but looked at her seriously .
Evidently in the back rooms , from which they had dashed out so impetuously , the conversation had been more amusing than the drawing room talk of society scandals , the weather , and Countess Apr'aksina .
Now and then they glanced at one another , hardly able to suppress their laughter .
The two young men , the student and the officer , friends from childhood , were of the same age and both handsome fellows , though not alike .
Bor'is was tall and fair , and his calm and handsome face had regular , delicate features .
Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression .
Dark hairs were already showing on his upper lip , and his whole face expressed impetuosity and enthusiasm .
Nicholas blushed when he entered the drawing room .
He evidently tried to find something to say , but failed .
Having said this he glanced at Nat'asha .
Bor'is did not laugh .
" You were meaning to go out , were n't you , Mamma ?
Do you want the carriage ? "
he asked his mother with a smile .
" Yes , yes , go and tell them to get it ready , " she answered , returning his smile .
Bor'is quietly left the room and went in search of Nat'asha .
The plump boy ran after them angrily , as if vexed that their program had been disturbed .
CHAPTER XII
And there was a place and everything waiting for him in the Archives Department !
Is n't that friendship ? "
remarked the count in an inquiring tone .
" But they say that war has been declared , " replied the visitor .
" They 've been saying so a long while , " said the count , " and they 'll say so again and again , and that will be the end of it .
My dear , there 's friendship for you , " he repeated . "
He 's joining the hussars . "
The visitor , not knowing what to say , shook her head .
" It 's not at all from friendship , " declared Nicholas , flaring up and turning away as if from a shameful aspersion .
" It is not from friendship at all ; I simply feel that the army is my vocation . "
He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor ; and they were both regarding him with a smile of approbation .
" Schubert , the colonel of the P'avlograd Hussars , is dining with us today .
He has been here on leave and is taking Nicholas back with him .
It ca n't be helped ! "
said the count , shrugging his shoulders and speaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him .
" I have already told you , Papa , " said his son , " that if you do n't wish to let me go , I 'll stay .
But I know I am no use anywhere except in the army ; I am not a diplomat or a government clerk .- I do n't know how to hide what I feel .
" As he spoke he kept glancing with the flirtatiousness of a handsome youth at S'onya and the young lady visitor .
The little kitten , feasting her eyes on him , seemed ready at any moment to start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature .
" All right , all right ! "
said the old count .
" He always flares up !
This Buonaparte has turned all their heads ; they all think of how he rose from an ensign and became Emperor .
Well , well , God grant it , " he added , not noticing his visitor 's sarcastic smile .
The elders began talking about Bonaparte .
Julie Kar'agina turned to young Rost'ov .
" What a pity you were n't at the Arkh'arovs ' on Thursday .
It was so dull without you , " said she , giving him a tender smile .
In the midst of his talk he glanced round at her .
She gave him a passionately angry glance , and hardly able to restrain her tears and maintain the artificial smile on her lips , she got up and left the room .
All Nicholas ' animation vanished .
He waited for the first pause in the conversation , and then with a distressed face left the room to find S'onya .
" How plainly all these young people wear their hearts on their sleeves ! " said Anna Mikh'aylovna , pointing to Nicholas as he went out .
"
Cousinage - dangereux voisinage , "
* she added .
* Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood .
And yet really the anxiety is greater now than the joy .
One is always , always anxious !
Especially just at this age , so dangerous both for girls and boys . "
" It all depends on the bringing up , " remarked the visitor .
" Yes , you 're quite right , " continued the countess .
" Yes , they are splendid , splendid youngsters , " chimed in the count , who always solved questions that seemed to him perplexing by deciding that everything was splendid . "
Just fancy : wants to be an hussar .
What 's one to do , my dear ? "
" What a charming creature your younger girl is , " said the visitor ; " a little volcano ! "
" Yes , a regular volcano , " said the count .
" Takes after me !
And what a voice she has ; though she 's my daughter , I tell the truth when I say she 'll be a singer , a second Salomoni !
We have engaged an Italian to give her lessons . "
" Is n't she too young ?
I have heard that it harms the voice to train it at that age . "
" Oh no , not at all too young ! " replied the count .
" Why , our mothers used to be married at twelve or thirteen . "
" And she 's in love with Bor'is already .
goodness knows what they might be up to on the sly " ( she meant that they would be kissing ) , " but as it is , I know every word she utters .
She will come running to me of her own accord in the evening and tell me everything .
Perhaps I spoil her , but really that seems the best plan .
With her elder sister I was stricter . "
" Yes , I was brought up quite differently , " remarked the handsome elder daughter , Countess V'era , with a smile .
But the smile did not enhance V'era 's beauty as smiles generally do ; on the contrary it gave her an unnatural , and therefore unpleasant , expression .
" People are always too clever with their eldest children and try to make something exceptional of them , " said the visitor .
" What 's the good of denying it , my dear ?
Our dear countess was too clever with V'era , " said the count .
"
Well , what of that ?
She 's turned out splendidly all the same , " he added , winking at V'era .
The guests got up and took their leave , promising to return to dinner .
" What manners !
I thought they would never go , " said the countess , when she had seen her guests out .
CHAPTER XIII
When Nat'asha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as the conservatory .
There she paused and stood listening to the conversation in the drawing room , waiting for Bor'is to come out .
She was already growing impatient , and stamped her foot , ready to cry at his not coming at once , when she heard the young man 's discreet steps approaching neither quickly nor slowly .
At this Nat'asha dashed swiftly among the flower tubs and hid there .
Bor'is paused in the middle of the room , looked round , brushed a little dust from the sleeve of his uniform , and going up to a mirror examined his handsome face .
Nat'asha , very still , peered out from her ambush , waiting to see what he would do .
He stood a little while before the glass , smiled , and walked toward the other door .
Nat'asha was about to call him but changed her mind . "
Let him look for me , " thought she .
Hardly had Bor'is gone than S'onya , flushed , in tears , and muttering angrily , came in at the other door .
Nat'asha checked her first impulse to run out to her , and remained in her hiding place , watching - as under an invisible cap - to see what went on in the world .
She was experiencing a new and peculiar pleasure .
S'onya , muttering to herself , kept looking round toward the drawing room door .
It opened and Nicholas came in .
" S'onya , what is the matter with you ?
How can you ? " said he , running up to her .
" It 's nothing , nothing ; leave me alone ! "
sobbed S'onya .
" Ah , I know what it is . "
" Well , if you do , so much the better , and you can go back to her ! "
" S'o - o - onya !
Look here !
How can you torture me and yourself like that , for a mere fancy ? " said Nicholas taking her hand .
S'onya did not pull it away , and left off crying .
Nat'asha , not stirring and scarcely breathing , watched from her ambush with sparkling eyes .
" What will happen now ? " thought she .
" S'onya !
What is anyone in the world to me ?
You alone are everything ! " said Nicholas . "
And I will prove it to you . "
" I do n't like you to talk like that . "
" Well , then , I wo n't ; only forgive me , S'onya ! "
He drew her to him and kissed her .
" Oh , how nice , " thought Nat'asha ; and when S'onya and Nicholas had gone out of the conservatory she followed and called Bor'is to her .
" Bor'is , come here , " said she with a sly and significant look .
" I have something to tell you .
Here , here ! "
and she led him into the conservatory to the place among the tubs where she had been hiding .
Bor'is followed her , smiling .
" What is the something ? " asked he .
She grew confused , glanced round , and , seeing the doll she had thrown down on one of the tubs , picked it up .
" Kiss the doll , " said she .
Bor'is looked attentively and kindly at her eager face , but did not reply .
" Do n't you want to ?
Well , then , come here , " said she , and went further in among the plants and threw down the doll . "
Closer , closer ! " she whispered .
She caught the young officer by his cuffs , and a look of solemnity and fear appeared on her flushed face .
" And me ?
Would you like to kiss me ?
" she whispered almost inaudibly , glancing up at him from under her brows , smiling , and almost crying from excitement .
Bor'is blushed .
" How funny you are ! " he said , bending down to her and blushing still more , but he waited and did nothing .
Then she slipped down among the flowerpots on the other side of the tubs and stood , hanging her head .
" Nat'asha , " he said , " you know that I love you , but .... "
" You are in love with me ? "
Nat'asha broke in .
" Yes , I am , but please do n't let us do like that ....
In another four years ... then I will ask for your hand . "
Nat'asha considered .
" Thirteen , fourteen , fifteen , sixteen , " she counted on her slender little fingers . "
All right !
Then it 's settled ? "
A smile of joy and satisfaction lit up her eager face .
" Settled ! " replied Bor'is .
" Forever ? " said the little girl . "
Till death itself ? "
She took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the adjoining sitting room .
CHAPTER XIV
After receiving her visitors , the countess was so tired that she gave orders to admit no more , but the porter was told to be sure to invite to dinner all who came " to congratulate . "
The countess wished to have a t^ete-`a - t^ete talk with the friend of her childhood , Princess Anna Mikh'aylovna , whom she had not seen properly since she returned from Petersburg .
Anna Mikh'aylovna , with her tear - worn but pleasant face , drew her chair nearer to that of the countess .
" With you I will be quite frank , " said Anna Mikh'aylovna .
" There are not many left of us old friends !
That 's why I so value your friendship . "
Anna Mikh'aylovna looked at V'era and paused .
The countess pressed her friend 's hand .
" V'era , " she said to her eldest daughter who was evidently not a favorite , " how is it you have so little tact ?
Do n't you see you are not wanted here ?
Go to the other girls , or ... "
The handsome V'era smiled contemptuously but did not seem at all hurt .
" If you had told me sooner , Mamma , I would have gone , " she replied as she rose to go to her own room .
But as she passed the sitting room she noticed two couples sitting , one pair at each window .
She stopped and smiled scornfully .
S'onya was sitting close to Nicholas who was copying out some verses for her , the first he had ever written .
Bor'is and Nat'asha were at the other window and ceased talking when V'era entered .
S'onya and Nat'asha looked at V'era with guilty , happy faces .
It was pleasant and touching to see these little girls in love ; but apparently the sight of them roused no pleasant feeling in V'era .
" How often have I asked you not to take my things ? "
she said .
" You have a room of your own , " and she took the inkstand from Nicholas .
" In a minute , in a minute , " he said , dipping his pen .
" You always manage to do things at the wrong time , " continued V'era .
" You came rushing into the drawing room so that everyone felt ashamed of you . "
Though what she said was quite just , perhaps for that very reason no one replied , and the four simply looked at one another .
She lingered in the room with the inkstand in her hand .
" And at your age what secrets can there be between Nat'asha and Bor'is , or between you two ?
It 's all nonsense ! "
" Now , V'era , what does it matter to you ? " said Nat'asha in defense , speaking very gently .
She seemed that day to be more than ever kind and affectionate to everyone .
" Very silly , " said V'era .
" I am ashamed of you .
Secrets indeed ! "
" All have secrets of their own , " answered Nat'asha , getting warmer .
" We do n't interfere with you and Berg . "
" I should think not , " said V'era , " because there can never be anything wrong in my behavior .
But I 'll just tell Mamma how you are behaving with Bor'is . "
" Nat'alya Ilyn'ichna behaves very well to me , " remarked Bor'is .
" I have nothing to complain of . "
" Do n't , Bor'is !
You are such a diplomat that it is really tiresome , " said Nat'asha in a mortified voice that trembled slightly .
( She used the word " diplomat , " which was just then much in vogue among the children , in the special sense they attached to it . )
" Why does she bother me ? "
And she added , turning to V'era , " You 'll never understand it , because you 've never loved anyone .
You have no heart !
You are a Madame de Genlis and nothing more " ( this nickname , bestowed on V'era by Nicholas , was considered very stinging ) , " and your greatest pleasure is to be unpleasant to people !
Go and flirt with Berg as much as you please , " she finished quickly .
" I shall at any rate not run after a young man before visitors ... "
" Well , now you 've done what you wanted , " put in Nicholas-"said unpleasant things to everyone and upset them .
Let 's go to the nursery . "
All four , like a flock of scared birds , got up and left the room .
" The unpleasant things were said to me , " remarked V'era , " I said none to anyone . "
" Madame de Genlis !
Madame de Genlis ! "
shouted laughing voices through the door .
The handsome V'era , who produced such an irritating and unpleasant effect on everyone , smiled and , evidently unmoved by what had been said to her , went to the looking glass and arranged her hair and scarf .
Looking at her own handsome face she seemed to become still colder and calmer .
In the drawing room the conversation was still going on .
" Ah , my dear , " said the countess , " my life is not all roses either .
Do n't I know that at the rate we are living our means wo n't last long ?
It 's all the Club and his easygoing nature .
Even in the country do we get any rest ?
Theatricals , hunting , and heaven knows what besides !
But do n't let 's talk about me ; tell me how you managed everything .
It 's quite astonishing .
How did you get things settled ?
I could n't possibly do it . "
" Ah , my love , " answered Anna Mikh'aylovna , " God grant you never know what it is to be left a widow without means and with a son you love to distraction !
One learns many things then , " she added with a certain pride .
" That lawsuit taught me much .
When I want to see one of those big people I write a note : ' Princess So - and - So desires an interview with So and
- So , ' and then I take a cab and go myself two , three , or four times - till I get what I want .
I do n't mind what they think of me . "
" Well , and to whom did you apply about B'ory ? " asked the countess .
" You see yours is already an officer in the Guards , while my Nicholas is going as a cadet .
There 's no one to interest himself for him .
To whom did you apply ? "
" To Prince Vas'ili .
He was so kind .
He at once agreed to everything , and put the matter before the Emperor , " said Princess Anna Mikh'aylovna enthusiastically , quite forgetting all the humiliation she had endured to gain her end .
" Has Prince Vas'ili aged much ? " asked the countess .
" I have not seen him since we acted together at the Rumy'antsovs ' theatricals .
I expect he has forgotten me .
He paid me attentions in those days , " said the countess , with a smile .
" He is just the same as ever , " replied Anna Mikh'aylovna , " overflowing with amiability .
His position has not turned his head at all .
He said to me , ' I am sorry I can do so little for you , dear Princess .
I am at your command . '
Yes , he is a fine fellow and a very kind relation .
But , Nataly , you know my love for my son : I would do anything for his happiness !
And my affairs are in such a bad way that my position is now a terrible one , " continued Anna Mikh'aylovna , sadly , dropping her voice .
" My wretched lawsuit takes all I have and makes no progress .
Would you believe it , I have literally not a penny and do n't know how to equip Bor'is .
" She took out her handkerchief and began to cry . "
I need five hundred rubles , and have only one twenty - five - ruble note .
I am in such a state ....
My only hope now is in Count Cyril Vlad'imirovich Bez'ukhov .
If he will not assist his godson - you know he is B'ory 's godfather - and allow him something for his maintenance , all my trouble will have been thrown away ....
I shall not be able to equip him . "
The countess ' eyes filled with tears and she pondered in silence .
" I often think , though , perhaps it 's a sin , " said the princess , " that here lives
Count Cyril Vlad'imirovich
Bez'ukhov so rich , all alone ... that tremendous fortune ... and what is his life worth ?
It 's a burden to him , and B'ory 's life is only just beginning .... "
" Surely he will leave something to Bor'is , " said the countess .
" Heaven only knows , my dear !
These rich grandees are so selfish .
Still , I will take Bor'is and go to see him at once , and I shall speak to him straight out .
Let people think what they will of me , it 's really all the same to me when my son 's fate is at stake . "
The princess rose .
" It 's now two o'clock and you dine at four .
There will just be time . "
And like a practical Petersburg lady who knows how to make the most of time , Anna Mikh'aylovna sent someone to call her son , and went into the anteroom with him .
He has been to the house , you know , and danced with the children .
Be sure to invite him , my dear .
We will see how Tar'as distinguishes himself today .
He says Count Orl'ov never gave such a dinner as ours will be ! "
CHAPTER XV
" My dear Bor'is , " said the mother , drawing her hand from beneath her old mantle and laying it timidly and tenderly on her son 's arm , " be affectionate and attentive to him .
Count Cyril Vlad'imirovich is your godfather after all , and your future depends on him .
Remember that , my dear , and be nice to him , as you so well know how to be . "
" If only I knew that anything besides humiliation would come of it ... " answered her son coldly . "
But I have promised and will do it for your sake . "
" We may as well go back , " said the son in French .
" My dear ! " exclaimed his mother imploringly , again laying her hand on his arm as if that touch might soothe or rouse him .
Bor'is said no more , but looked inquiringly at his mother without taking off his cloak .
" My friend , " said Anna Mikh'aylovna in gentle tones , addressing the hall porter ,
" I know Count Cyril Vlad'imirovich is very ill ...
that 's why I have come ...
I am a relation .
I shall not disturb him , my friend ...
I only need see Prince Vas'ili
Serg'eevich
: he is staying here , is he not ?
Please announce me . "
The hall porter sullenly pulled a bell that rang upstairs , and turned away .
" Princess Drubetsk'aya to see Prince Vas'ili
Serg'eevich , " he called to a footman dressed in knee breeches , shoes , and a swallow - tail coat , who ran downstairs and looked over from the halfway landing .
The mother smoothed the folds of her dyed silk dress before a large Venetian mirror in the wall , and in her trodden - down shoes briskly ascended the carpeted stairs .
" My dear , " she said to her son , once more stimulating him by a touch , " you promised me ! "
The son , lowering his eyes , followed her quietly .
They entered the large hall , from which one of the doors led to the apartments assigned to Prince Vas'ili .
This was the celebrated Petersburg doctor , Lorrain .
" Then it is certain ? " said the prince .
" Prince , humanum est errare , * but ... " replied the doctor , swallowing his r 's , and pronouncing the Latin words with a French accent .
* To err is human .
" Very well , very well ... "
Seeing Anna Mikh'aylovna and her son , Prince Vas'ili dismissed the doctor with a bow and approached them silently and with a look of inquiry .
The son noticed that an expression of profound sorrow suddenly clouded his mother 's face , and he smiled slightly .
" Ah , Prince !
In what sad circumstances we meet again !
And how is our dear invalid ?
" said she , as though unaware of the cold offensive look fixed on her .
Prince Vas'ili stared at her and at Bor'is questioningly and perplexed .
Bor'is bowed politely .
Prince Vas'ili without acknowledging the bow turned to Anna Mikh'aylovna , answering her query by a movement of the head and lips indicating very little hope for the patient .
" Is it possible ? " exclaimed Anna Mikh'aylovna .
"
Oh , how awful !
It is terrible to think ....
This is my son , " she added , indicating Bor'is . "
He wanted to thank you himself . "
Bor'is bowed again politely .
" Believe me , Prince , a mother 's heart will never forget what you have done for us . "
" Try to serve well and show yourself worthy , " added he , addressing Bor'is with severity .
" I am glad ....
Are you here on leave ?
" he went on in his usual tone of indifference .
" Are you living with your mother ? "
" I am living at Countess Rost'ova 's , " replied Bor'is , again adding , " your excellency . "
" That is , with Ily'a Rost'ov who married Nataly Shinshin'a , " said Anna Mikh'aylovna .
" I know , I know , " answered Prince Vas'ili in his monotonous voice .
" I never could understand how Nataly made up her mind to marry that unlicked bear !
A perfectly absurd and stupid fellow , and a gambler too , I am told . "
" What do the doctors say ? " asked the princess after a pause , her worn face again expressing deep sorrow .
" They give little hope , " replied the prince .
" And I should so like to thank Uncle once for all his kindness to me and Bor'is .
He is his godson , " she added , her tone suggesting that this fact ought to give Prince Vas'ili much satisfaction .
Prince Vas'ili became thoughtful and frowned .
Anna Mikh'aylovna saw that he was afraid of finding in her a rival for Count Bez'ukhov 's fortune , and hastened to reassure him .
They are still young ....
" She bent her head and continued in a whisper : " Has he performed his final duty , Prince ?
How priceless are those last moments !
It can make things no worse , and it is absolutely necessary to prepare him if he is so ill .
We women , Prince , " and she smiled tenderly , " always know how to say these things .
I absolutely must see him , however painful it may be for me .
I am used to suffering . "
Evidently the prince understood her , and also understood , as he had done at Anna P'avlovna 's , that it would be difficult to get rid of Anna Mikh'aylovna .
" Would not such a meeting be too trying for him , dear Anna Mikh'aylovna ? " said he .
" Let us wait until evening .
The doctors are expecting a crisis . "
" But one can not delay , Prince , at such a moment !
Consider that the welfare of his soul is at stake .
Ah , it is awful : the duties of a Christian ... "
A door of one of the inner rooms opened and one of the princesses , the count 's niece , entered with a cold , stern face .
The length of her body was strikingly out of proportion to her short legs .
Prince Vas'ili turned to her .
" Well , how is he ? "
" Still the same ; but what can you expect , this noise ... " said the princess , looking at Anna Mikh'aylovna as at a stranger .
" Ah , my dear , I hardly knew you , " said Anna Mikh'aylovna with a happy smile , ambling lightly up to the count 's niece .
" I have come , and am at your service to help you nurse my uncle .
I imagine what you have gone through , " and she sympathetically turned up her eyes .
They ask him to dinner .
I suppose he wo n't go ?
" she continued , turning to the prince .
" On the contrary , " replied the prince , who had plainly become depressed , " I shall be only too glad if you relieve me of that young man ....
Here he is , and the count has not once asked for him . "
He shrugged his shoulders .
A footman conducted Bor'is down one flight of stairs and up another , to Pierre 's rooms .
CHAPTER XVI
Pierre , after all , had not managed to choose a career for himself in Petersburg , and had been expelled from there for riotous conduct and sent to Moscow .
The story told about him at Count Rost'ov 's was true .
Pierre had taken part in tying a policeman to a bear .
He had now been for some days in Moscow and was staying as usual at his father 's house .
Entering the drawing room , where the princesses spent most of their time , he greeted the ladies , two of whom were sitting at embroidery frames while a third read aloud .
It was the eldest who was reading - the one who had met Anna Mikh'aylovna .
The two younger ones were embroidering : both were rosy and pretty and they differed only in that one had a little mole on her lip which made her much prettier .
Pierre was received as if he were a corpse or a leper .
She drew her wool down through the canvas and , scarcely able to refrain from laughing , stooped as if trying to make out the pattern .
" How do you do , cousin ? " said Pierre .
" You do n't recognize me ? "
" I recognize you only too well , too well . "
" How is the count ?
Can I see him ? " asked Pierre , awkwardly as usual , but unabashed .
" The count is suffering physically and mentally , and apparently you have done your best to increase his mental sufferings . "
" Can I see the count ? "
Pierre again asked .
" Hm .... If you wish to kill him , to kill him outright , you can see him ...
Olga went out .
Pierre stood looking at the sisters ; then he bowed and said : " Then I will go to my rooms .
You will let me know when I can see him . "
And he left the room , followed by the low but ringing laughter of the sister with the mole .
Next day Prince Vas'ili had arrived and settled in the count 's house .
The count is very , very ill , and you must not see him at all . "
Since then Pierre had not been disturbed and had spent the whole time in his rooms upstairs .
" England is done for , " said he , scowling and pointing his finger at someone unseen . "
Mr. Pitt , as a traitor to the nation and to the rights of man , is sentenced to ... "
Pierre paused .
He had left Moscow when Bor'is was a boy of fourteen , and had quite forgotten him , but in his usual impulsive and hearty way he took Bor'is by the hand with a friendly smile .
" Do you remember me ? "
asked Bor'is quietly with a pleasant smile .
" I have come with my mother to see the count , but it seems he is not well . "
" Yes , it seems he is ill .
People are always disturbing him , " answered Pierre , trying to remember who this young man was .
Bor'is felt that Pierre did not recognize him but did not consider it necessary to introduce himself , and without experiencing the least embarrassment looked Pierre straight in the face .
" Count Rost'ov asks you to come to dinner today , " said he , after a considerable pause which made Pierre feel uncomfortable .
" Ah , Count Rost'ov ! "
exclaimed Pierre joyfully .
" Then you are his son , Ily'a ?
Only fancy
, I did n't know you at first .
Do you remember how we went to the Sparrow Hills with Madame Jacquot ? ...
It 's such an age ... "
" You are mistaken , " said Bor'is deliberately , with a bold and slightly sarcastic smile .
" I am Bor'is , son of Princess Anna Mikh'aylovna Drubetsk'aya .
Rost'ov , the father , is Ily'a , and his son is Nicholas .
I never knew any Madame Jacquot . "
Pierre shook his head and arms as if attacked by mosquitoes or bees .
" Oh dear , what am I thinking about ?
I 've mixed everything up .
One has so many relatives in Moscow !
So you are Bor'is ?
Of course .
Well , now we know where we are .
And what do you think of the Boulogne expedition ?
The English will come off badly , you know , if Napoleon gets across the Channel .
I think the expedition is quite feasible .
If only Villeneuve does n't make a mess of things ! "
Bor'is knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition ; he did not read the papers and it was the first time he had heard Villeneuve 's name .
" We here in Moscow are more occupied with dinner parties and scandal than with politics , " said he in his quiet ironical tone .
" I know nothing about it and have not thought about it .
Moscow is chiefly busy with gossip , " he continued .
" Just now they are talking about you and your father . "
Pierre smiled in his good - natured way as if afraid for his companion 's sake that the latter might say something he would afterwards regret .
But Bor'is spoke distinctly , clearly , and dryly , looking straight into Pierre 's eyes .
" Moscow has nothing else to do but gossip , " Bor'is went on .
" Everybody is wondering to whom the count will leave his fortune , though he may perhaps outlive us all , as I sincerely hope he will ... "
" Yes , it is all very horrid , " interrupted Pierre , " very horrid . "
Pierre was still afraid that this officer might inadvertently say something disconcerting to himself .
" So it does , " thought Pierre .
" But I just wish to say , to avoid misunderstandings , that you are quite mistaken if you reckon me or my mother among such people .
" Well , this is strange !
Do you suppose I ... who could think ? ...
I know very well ... "
But Bor'is again interrupted him .
" I am glad I have spoken out fully .
Perhaps you did not like it ?
You must excuse me , " said he , putting Pierre at ease instead of being put at ease by him , " but I hope I have not offended you .
I always make it a rule to speak out ...
Well , what answer am I to take ?
Will you come to dinner at the Rost'ovs ' ? "
And Bor'is , having apparently relieved himself of an onerous duty and extricated himself from an awkward situation and placed another in it , became quite pleasant again .
" No , but I say , " said Pierre , calming down , " you are a wonderful fellow !
What you have just said is good , very good .
Of course you do n't know me .
We have not met for such a long time ... not since we were children .
You might think that I ...
I understand , quite understand .
I could not have done it myself , I should not have had the courage , but it 's splendid .
I am very glad to have made your acquaintance .
It 's queer , " he added after a pause , " that you should have suspected me ! "
He began to laugh . "
Well , what of it !
I hope we 'll get better acquainted , " and he pressed Bor'is ' hand . "
Do you know , I have not once been in to see the count .
He has not sent for me ....
I am sorry for him as a man , but what can one do ? "
" And so you think Napoleon will manage to get an army across ? " asked Bor'is with a smile .
Pierre saw that Bor'is wished to change the subject , and being of the same mind he began explaining the advantages and disadvantages of the Boulogne expedition .
A footman came in to summon Bor'is - the princess was going .
Pierre , in order to make Bor'is ' better acquaintance , promised to come to dinner , and warmly pressing his hand looked affectionately over his spectacles into Bor'is ' eyes .
As often happens in early youth , especially to one who leads a lonely life , he felt an unaccountable tenderness for this young man and made up his mind that they would be friends .
Prince Vas'ili saw the princess off .
She held a handkerchief to her eyes and her face was tearful .
" It is dreadful , dreadful ! " she was saying , " but cost me what it may I shall do my duty .
I will come and spend the night .
He must not be left like this .
Every moment is precious .
I ca n't think why his nieces put it off .
Perhaps God will help me to find a way to prepare him ! ...
Adieu , Prince !
May God support you ... "
" Adieu , ma bonne , " answered Prince Vas'ili turning away from her .
" Oh , he is in a dreadful state , " said the mother to her son when they were in the carriage . "
He hardly recognizes anybody . "
" I do n't understand , Mamma - what is his attitude to Pierre ? " asked the son .
" The will will show that , my dear ; our fate also depends on it . "
" But why do you expect that he will leave us anything ? "
" Ah , my dear !
He is so rich , and we are so poor ! "
" Well , that is hardly a sufficient reason , Mamma ... "
" Oh , Heaven !
How ill he is ! " exclaimed the mother .
CHAPTER XVII
After Anna Mikh'aylovna had driven off with her son to visit Count Cyril Vlad'imirovich Bez'ukhov , Countess Rost'ova sat for a long time all alone applying her handkerchief to her eyes .
At last she rang .
" What is the matter with you , my dear ? " she said crossly to the maid who kept her waiting some minutes .
" Do n't you wish to serve me ?
Then I 'll find you another place . "
" I am very sorry , ma'am , " answered the maid .
" Ask the count to come to me . "
The count came waddling in to see his wife with a rather guilty look as usual .
" Well , little countess ?
What a saut'e of game au mad`ere we are to have , my dear !
I tasted it .
The thousand rubles I paid for Tar'as were not ill - spent .
He is worth it ! "
He sat down by his wife , his elbows on his knees and his hands ruffling his gray hair .
" What are your commands , little countess ? "
" You see , my dear ... What 's that mess ?
" she said , pointing to his waistcoat . "
It 's the saut'e , most likely , " she added with a smile . "
Well , you see , Count , I want some money . "
Her face became sad .
" Oh , little countess ! " ... and the count began bustling to get out his pocketbook .
" I want a great deal , Count !
I want five hundred rubles , " and taking out her cambric handkerchief
she began wiping her husband 's waistcoat .
" Yes , immediately , immediately !
Hey , who 's there ? "
he called out in a tone only used by persons who are certain that those they call will rush to obey the summons .
" Send Dm'itri to me ! "
Dm'itri , a man of good family who had been brought up in the count 's house and now managed all his affairs , stepped softly into the room .
" This is what I want , my dear fellow , " said the count to the deferential young man who had entered .
" Bring me ... " he reflected a moment , " yes , bring me seven hundred rubles , yes !
But mind , do n't bring me such tattered and dirty notes as last time , but nice clean ones for the countess . "
" Yes , Dm'itri , clean ones , please , " said the countess , sighing deeply .
" When would you like them , your excellency ? " asked Dm'itri . "
Allow me to inform you ...
But , do n't be uneasy , " he added , noticing that the count was beginning to breathe heavily and quickly which was always a sign of approaching anger .
" I was forgetting ...
Do you wish it brought at once ? "
" Yes , yes ; just so !
Bring it .
Give it to the countess . "
" What a treasure that Dm'itri is , " added the count with a smile when the young man had departed .
" There is never any ' impossible ' with him .
That 's a thing I hate !
Everything is possible . "
" Ah , money , Count , money !
How much sorrow it causes in the world , " said the countess .
" But I am in great need of this sum . "
" You , my little countess , are a notorious spendthrift , " said the count , and having kissed his wife 's hand he went back to his study .
When Anna Mikh'aylovna returned from Count Bez'ukhov 's the money , all in clean notes , was lying ready under a handkerchief on the countess ' little table , and Anna Mikh'aylovna noticed that something was agitating her .
" Well , my dear ? " asked the countess .
" Oh , what a terrible state he is in !
One would not know him , he is so ill !
I was only there a few moments and hardly said a word ... "
Anna Mikh'aylovna instantly guessed her intention and stooped to be ready to embrace the countess at the appropriate moment .
" This is for Bor'is from me , for his outfit . "
Anna Mikh'aylovna was already embracing her and weeping .
The countess wept too .
They wept because they were friends , and because they were kindhearted , and because they - friends from childhood - had to think about such a base thing as money , and because their youth was over ....
But those tears were pleasant to them both .
CHAPTER XVIII
Countess Rost'ova , with her daughters and a large number of guests , was already seated in the drawing room .
The count took the gentlemen into his study and showed them his choice collection of Turkish pipes .
From time to time he went out to ask : " Has n't she come yet ?
" They were expecting M'arya Dm'itrievna Akhros'imova , known in society as le terrible dragon , a lady distinguished not for wealth or rank , but for common sense and frank plainness of speech .
In the count 's room , which was full of tobacco smoke , they talked of the war that had been announced in a manifesto , and about the recruiting .
None of them had yet seen the manifesto , but they all knew it had appeared .
The count sat on the sofa between two guests who were smoking and talking .
One of them was a sallow , clean - shaven civilian with a thin and wrinkled face , already growing old , though he was dressed like a most fashionable young man .
He sat with his legs up on the sofa as if quite at home and , having stuck an amber mouthpiece far into his mouth , was inhaling the smoke spasmodically and screwing up his eyes .
This was an old bachelor , Shinsh'in , a cousin of the countess ' , a man with " a sharp tongue " as they said in Moscow society .
He seemed to be condescending to his companion .
The count sat between them and listened attentively .
His favorite occupation when not playing boston , a card game he was very fond of , was that of listener , especially when he succeeded in setting two loquacious talkers at one another .
Vous comptez vous faire des rentes sur l''etat ; * you want to make something out of your company ? "
* You expect to make an income out of the government .
" No , Peter Nikol'aevich ; I only want to show that in the cavalry the advantages are far less than in the infantry .
Just consider my own position now , Peter Nikol'aevich ... "
Berg always spoke quietly , politely , and with great precision .
His conversation always related entirely to himself ; he would remain calm and silent when the talk related to any topic that had no direct bearing on himself .
He could remain silent for hours without being at all put out of countenance himself or making others uncomfortable , but as soon as the conversation concerned himself he would begin to talk circumstantially and with evident satisfaction .
" Consider my position , Peter Nikol'aevich .
" Besides that , Peter Nikol'aevich , by exchanging into the Guards
I shall be in a more prominent position , " continued Berg , " and vacancies occur much more frequently in the Foot Guards .
Then just think what can be done with two hundred and thirty rubles !
I even manage to put a little aside and to send something to my father , " he went on , emitting a smoke ring .
" La balance y est ...
*
A German knows how to skin a flint , as the proverb says , " remarked Shinsh'in , moving his pipe to the other side of his mouth and winking at the count .
* So that squares matters .
The count burst out laughing .
The other guests seeing that Shinsh'in was talking came up to listen .
Berg evidently enjoyed narrating all this , and did not seem to suspect that others , too , might have their own interests .
But all he said was so prettily sedate , and the na"ivet'e of his youthful egotism was so obvious , that he disarmed his hearers .
" Well , my boy , you 'll get along wherever you go - foot or horse - that I 'll warrant , " said Shinsh'in , patting him on the shoulder and taking his feet off the sofa .
Berg smiled joyously .
The count , followed by his guests , went into the drawing room .
* Hors d'oeuvres .
Pierre had come just at dinnertime and was sitting awkwardly in the middle of the drawing room on the first chair he had come across , blocking the way for everyone .
The countess tried to make him talk , but he went on na"ively looking around through his spectacles as if in search of somebody and answered all her questions in monosyllables .
He was in the way and was the only one who did not notice the fact .
" You have only lately arrived ? " the countess asked him .
" Oui , madame , " replied he , looking around him .
" You have not yet seen my husband ? "
" Non , madame . "
He smiled quite inappropriately .
" You have been in Paris recently , I believe ?
I suppose it 's very interesting . "
" Very interesting . "
The countess exchanged glances with Anna Mikh'aylovna .
The other guests were all conversing with one another .
"
The Razum'ovskis ...
It was charming ...
You are very kind ...
Countess Apr'aksina ... " was heard on all sides .
The countess rose and went into the ballroom .
" M'arya Dm'itrievna ? " came her voice from there .
" Herself , " came the answer in a rough voice , and M'arya Dm'itrievna entered the room .
All the unmarried ladies and even the married ones except the very oldest rose .
M'arya Dm'itrievna paused at the door .
Tall and stout , holding high her fifty - year - old head with its gray curls , she stood surveying the guests , and leisurely arranged her wide sleeves as if rolling them up .
M'arya Dm'itrievna always spoke in Russian .
" Health and happiness to her whose name day we are keeping and to her children , " she said , in her loud , full - toned voice which drowned all others . "
Well , you old sinner
, " she went on , turning to the count who was kissing her hand , " you 're feeling dull in Moscow , I daresay ?
Nowhere to hunt with your dogs ?
But what is to be done , old man ?
Just see how these nestlings are growing up , " and she pointed to the girls .
" You must look for husbands for them whether you like it or not .... "
" Well , " said she , " how 's my Cossack ? "
( M'arya Dm'itrievna always called Nat'asha a Cossack ) and she stroked the child 's arm as she came up fearless and gay to kiss her hand .
" I know she 's a scamp of a girl , but I like her . "
" Eh , eh , friend !
Come here a bit , " said she , assuming a soft high tone of voice . "
Come here , my friend ... " and she ominously tucked up her sleeves still higher .
Pierre approached , looking at her in a childlike way through his spectacles .
" Come nearer , come nearer , friend !
I used to be the only one to tell your father the truth when he was in favor , and in your case it 's my evident duty . "
She paused .
All were silent , expectant of what was to follow , for this was clearly only a prelude .
" A fine lad !
My word !
A fine lad ! ...
His father lies on his deathbed and he amuses himself setting a policeman astride a bear !
For shame , sir , for shame !
It would be better if you went to the war . "
She turned away and gave her hand to the count , who could hardly keep from laughing .
" Well , I suppose it is time we were at table ? " said M'arya Dm'itrievna .
Berg gave his arm to V'era .
The smiling Julie Kar'agina went in with Nicholas .
After them other couples followed , filling the whole dining hall , and last of all the children , tutors , and governesses followed singly .
The footmen began moving about , chairs scraped , the band struck up in the gallery , and the guests settled down in their places .
Then the strains of the count 's household band were replaced by the clatter of knives and forks , the voices of visitors , and the soft steps of the footmen .
At one end of the table sat the countess with M'arya Dm'itrievna on her right and Anna Mikh'aylovna on her left , the other lady visitors were farther down .
At the other end sat the count , with the hussar colonel on his left and Shinsh'in and the other male visitors on his right .
Midway down the long table on one side sat the grown - up young people : V'era beside Berg , and Pierre beside Bor'is ; and on the other side , the children , tutors , and governesses .
From behind the crystal decanters and fruit vases , the count kept glancing at his wife and her tall cap with its light - blue ribbons , and busily filled his neighbors ' glasses , not neglecting his own .
Berg with tender smiles was saying to V'era
that love is not an earthly but a heavenly feeling .
Bor'is was telling his new friend Pierre who the guests were and exchanging glances with Nat'asha , who was sitting opposite .
Pierre spoke little but examined the new faces , and ate a great deal .
Of the two soups he chose turtle with savory patties and went on to the game without omitting a single dish or one of the wines .
Of the four crystal glasses engraved with the count 's monogram that stood before his plate , Pierre held out one at random and drank with enjoyment , gazing with ever - increasing amiability at the other guests .
Nat'asha , who sat opposite , was looking at Bor'is as girls of thirteen look at the boy they are in love with and have just kissed for the first time .
Sometimes that same look fell on Pierre , and that funny lively little girl 's look made him inclined to laugh without knowing why .
Nicholas sat at some distance from S'onya , beside Julie Kar'agina , to whom he was again talking with the same involuntary smile .
S'onya wore a company smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy ; now she turned pale , now blushed and strained every nerve to overhear what Nicholas and Julie were saying to one another .
The governess kept looking round uneasily as if preparing to resent any slight that might be put upon the children .
CHAPTER XIX
At the men 's end of the table the talk grew more and more animated .
The colonel told them that the declaration of war had already appeared in Petersburg and that a copy , which he had himself seen , had that day been forwarded by courier to the commander in chief .
" And why the deuce are we going to fight Bonaparte ? "
remarked Shinsh'in . "
He has stopped Austria 's cackle and I fear it will be our turn next . "
The colonel was a stout , tall , plethoric German , evidently devoted to the service and patriotically Russian .
He resented Shinsh'in 's remark .
" It is for the reasson , my goot sir , " said he , speaking with a German accent , " for the reasson zat ze Emperor knows zat .
He declares in ze manifessto zat he can not fiew wiz indifference
ze danger vreatening Russia and zat ze safety and dignity of ze Empire as vell as ze sanctity of its alliances ...
" he spoke this last word with particular emphasis as if in it lay the gist of the matter .
Then with the unerring official memory that characterized him he repeated from the opening words of the manifesto :
" Zat , my dear sir , is vy ... " he concluded , drinking a tumbler of wine with dignity and looking to the count for approval .
" Connaissez - vous le Proverbe : * ' Jerome , Jerome , do not roam , but turn spindles at home ! ' ? " said Shinsh'in , puckering his brows and smiling . "
Cela nous convient ` a merveille.*(2 )
Suv'orov now - he knew what he was about ; yet they beat him ` a plate couture,*(3 ) and where are we to find Suv'orovs now ?
Je vous demande un peu , "
* ( 4 ) said he , continually changing from French to Russian .
* Do you know the proverb ?
* ( 2 ) That suits us down to the ground .
* ( 3 ) Hollow .
* ( 4 ) I just ask you that .
And ve must discuss it as little as po - o - ossible " ...
he dwelt particularly on the word possible ... " as po - o - ossible , " he ended , again turning to the count . "
Zat is how ve old hussars look at it , and zere 's an end of it !
And how do you , a young man and a young hussar , how do you judge of it ?
" he added , addressing Nicholas , who when he heard that the war was being discussed had turned from his partner with eyes and ears intent on the colonel .
" What you said just now was splendid ! " said his partner Julie .
S'onya trembled all over and blushed to her ears and behind them and down to her neck and shoulders while Nicholas was speaking .
Pierre listened to the colonel 's speech and nodded approvingly .
" That 's fine , " said he .
" The young man 's a real hussar ! " shouted the colonel , again thumping the table .
" What are you making such a noise about over there ? "
M'arya Dm'itrievna 's deep voice suddenly inquired from the other end of the table .
" What are you thumping the table for ? " she demanded of the hussar , " and why are you exciting yourself ?
Do you think the French are here ? "
" I am speaking ze truce , " replied the hussar with a smile .
" It 's all about the war , " the count shouted down the table .
" You know my son 's going , M'arya Dm'itrievna ?
My son is going . "
" I have four sons in the army but still I do n't fret .
It is all in God 's hands .
You may die in your bed or God may spare you in a battle , " replied M'arya Dm'itrievna 's deep voice , which easily carried the whole length of the table .
" That 's true ! "
Once more the conversations concentrated , the ladies ' at the one end and the men 's at the other .
" You wo n't ask , " Nat'asha 's little brother was saying ; " I know you wo n't ask ! "
" I will , " replied Nat'asha .
Her face suddenly flushed with reckless and joyous resolution .
She half rose , by a glance inviting Pierre , who sat opposite , to listen to what was coming , and turning to her mother :
" Mamma ! " rang out the clear contralto notes of her childish voice , audible the whole length of the table .
The conversation was hushed .
" Mamma !
What sweets are we going to have ? " and Nat'asha 's voice sounded still more firm and resolute .
The countess tried to frown , but could not .
M'arya Dm'itrievna shook her fat finger .
" Cossack ! "
she said threateningly .
Most of the guests , uncertain how to regard this sally , looked at the elders .
" You had better take care ! " said the countess .
" Mamma !
What sweets are we going to have ?
" Nat'asha again cried boldly , with saucy gaiety , confident that her prank would be taken in good part .
S'onya and fat little P'etya doubled up with laughter .
" You see !
I have asked , " whispered Nat'asha to her little brother and to Pierre , glancing at him again .
" Ice pudding , but you wo n't get any , " said M'arya Dm'itrievna .
Nat'asha saw there was nothing to be afraid of and so she braved even M'arya Dm'itrievna .
" M'arya Dm'itrievna !
What kind of ice pudding ?
I do n't like ice cream . "
" Carrot ices . "
" No ! What kind , M'arya Dm'itrievna ?
What kind ?
" she almost screamed ; " I want to know ! "
M'arya Dm'itrievna and the countess burst out laughing , and all the guests joined in .
Everyone laughed , not at M'arya Dm'itrievna 's answer but at the incredible boldness and smartness of this little girl who had dared to treat M'arya Dm'itrievna in this fashion .
Nat'asha only desisted when she had been told that there would be pineapple ice .
Before the ices , champagne was served round .
Again the footmen rushed about , chairs scraped , and in the same order in which they had entered but with redder faces , the guests returned to the drawing room and to the count 's study .
CHAPTER XX
The card tables were drawn out , sets made up for boston , and the count 's visitors settled themselves , some in the two drawing rooms , some in the sitting room , some in the library .
The count , holding his cards fanwise , kept himself with difficulty from dropping into his usual after - dinner nap , and laughed at everything .
The young people , at the countess ' instigation , gathered round the clavichord and harp .
Julie by general request played first .
After she had played a little air with variations on the harp , she joined the other young ladies in begging Nat'asha and Nicholas , who were noted for their musical talent , to sing something .
Nat'asha , who was treated as though she were grown up , was evidently very proud of this but at the same time felt shy .
" What shall we sing ? " she said .
" ' The Brook , ' " suggested Nicholas .
" Well , then , let 's be quick .
Bor'is , come here , " said Nat'asha . "
But where is S'onya ? "
She looked round and seeing that her friend was not in the room ran to look for her .
Running into S'onya 's room and not finding her there , Nat'asha ran to the nursery , but S'onya was not there either .
Nat'asha concluded that she must be on the chest in the passage .
The chest in the passage was the place of mourning for the younger female generation in the Rost'ov household .
" S'onya !
What is it ?
What is the matter ? ...
Oo ...
Oo ...
Oo ... ! "
And Nat'asha 's large mouth widened , making her look quite ugly , and she began to wail like a baby without knowing why , except that S'onya was crying .
S'onya tried to lift her head to answer but could not , and hid her face still deeper in the bed .
Nat'asha wept , sitting on the blue - striped feather bed and hugging her friend .
With an effort S'onya sat up and began wiping her eyes and explaining .
no one can understand ... what a soul he has ! "
And she began to cry again because he had such a noble soul .
" It 's all very well for you ...
I am not envious ...
I love you and Bor'is also , " she went on , gaining a little strength ; " he is nice ...
there are no difficulties in your way ....
But Nicholas is my cousin ...
one would have to ... the Metropolitan himself ... and even then it ca n't be done .
And besides , if she tells Mamma " ( S'onya looked upon the countess as her mother and called her so ) " that I am spoiling Nicholas ' career and am heartless and ungrateful , while truly ...
God is my witness , " and she made the sign of the cross , " I love her so much , and all of you , only V'era ... And what for ?
What have I done to her ?
I am so grateful to you that I would willingly sacrifice everything , only I have nothing .... "
S'onya could not continue , and again hid her face in her hands and in the feather bed .
Nat'asha began consoling her , but her face showed that she understood all the gravity of her friend 's trouble .
" S'onya , " she suddenly exclaimed , as if she had guessed the true reason of her friend 's sorrow , " I 'm sure V'era has said something to you since dinner ?
Has n't she ? "
You see how he 's been with her all day ...
Nat'asha , what have I done to deserve it ? ... "
And again she began to sob , more bitterly than before .
Nat'asha lifted her up , hugged her , and , smiling through her tears , began comforting her .
" S'onya , do n't believe her , darling !
Do n't believe her !
Do you remember how we and Nicholas , all three of us , talked in the sitting room after supper ?
Why , we settled how everything was to be .
I do n't quite remember how , but do n't you remember that it could all be arranged and how nice it all was ?
There 's Uncle Shinsh'in 's brother has married his first cousin .
And we are only second cousins , you know .
And Bor'is says it is quite possible .
You know I have told him all about it .
And he is so clever and so good ! "
said Nat'asha .
" Do n't you cry , S'onya , dear love , darling S'onya ! "
and she kissed her and laughed .
" V'era 's spiteful ; never mind her !
And all will come right
and she wo n't say anything to Mamma .
Nicholas will tell her himself , and he does n't care at all for Julie . "
Nat'asha kissed her on the hair .
S'onya sat up .
The little kitten brightened , its eyes shone , and it seemed ready to lift its tail , jump down on its soft paws , and begin playing with the ball of worsted as a kitten should .
" Do you think so ? ...
Really ?
Truly ?
" she said , quickly smoothing her frock and hair .
" Really , truly ! " answered Nat'asha , pushing in a crisp lock that had strayed from under her friend 's plaits .
Both laughed .
" Well , let 's go and sing ' The Brook . ' "
" Come along ! "
" Do you know , that fat Pierre who sat opposite me is so funny ! " said Nat'asha , stopping suddenly .
" I feel so happy ! "
And she set off at a run along the passage .
At the visitors ' request the young people sang the quartette , " The Brook , " with which everyone was delighted .
Then Nicholas sang a song he had just learned :
At nighttime in the moon 's fair glow
How sweet , as fancies wander free , To feel that in this world there 's one Who still is thinking but of thee !
That while her fingers touch the harp Wafting sweet music o'er the lea , It is for thee thus swells her heart , Sighing its message out to thee ...
A day or two , then bliss unspoilt ,
But oh ! till then I can not live ! ...
He had not finished the last verse before the young people began to get ready to dance in the large hall , and the sound of the feet and the coughing of the musicians were heard from the gallery .
Pierre was sitting in the drawing room where Shinsh'in had engaged him , as a man recently returned from abroad , in a political conversation in which several others joined but which bored Pierre .
When the music began Nat'asha came in and walking straight up to Pierre said , laughing and blushing :
" Mamma told me to ask you to join the dancers . "
" I am afraid of mixing the figures , " Pierre replied ; " but if you will be my teacher ... "
And lowering his big arm he offered it to the slender little girl .
While the couples were arranging themselves and the musicians tuning up , Pierre sat down with his little partner .
Nat'asha was perfectly happy ; she was dancing with a grown - up man , who had been abroad .
She was sitting in a conspicuous place and talking to him like a grown - up lady .
She had a fan in her hand that one of the ladies had given her to hold .
Assuming quite the pose of a society woman ( heaven knows when and where she had learned it )
she talked with her partner , fanning herself and smiling over the fan .
" Dear , dear !
Just look at her ! "
exclaimed the countess as she crossed the ballroom , pointing to Nat'asha .
Nat'asha blushed and laughed .
" Well , really , Mamma !
Why should you ?
What is there to be surprised at ? "
They now , stretching themselves after sitting so long , and replacing their purses and pocketbooks , entered the ballroom .
First came M'arya Dm'itrievna and the count , both with merry countenances .
The count , with playful ceremony somewhat in ballet style , offered his bent arm to M'arya Dm'itrievna .
" Sem"en !
Do you know the Daniel Cooper ? "
This was the count 's favorite dance , which he had danced in his youth .
( Strictly speaking , Daniel Cooper was one figure of the anglaise . )
" Just look at the master !
A regular eagle he is ! "
loudly remarked the nurse , as she stood in one of the doorways .
The count danced well and knew it .
But his partner could not and did not want to dance well .
Her enormous figure stood erect , her powerful arms hanging down ( she had handed her reticule to the countess ) , and only her stern but handsome face really joined in the dance .
What was expressed by the whole of the count 's plump figure , in M'arya Dm'itrievna found expression only in her more and more beaming face and quivering nose .
The dance grew livelier and livelier .
The other couples could not attract a moment 's attention to their own evolutions and did not even try to do so .
All were watching the count and M'arya Dm'itrievna .
Nat'asha kept pulling everyone by sleeve or dress , urging them to " look at Papa ! "
though as it was they never took their eyes off the couple .
In the intervals of the dance the count , breathing deeply , waved and shouted to the musicians to play faster .
Both partners stood still , breathing heavily and wiping their faces with their cambric handkerchiefs .
" That 's how we used to dance in our time , ma ch`ere , " said the count .
" That was a Daniel Cooper ! " exclaimed M'arya Dm'itrievna , tucking up her sleeves and puffing heavily .
CHAPTER XXI
The doctors pronounced recovery impossible .
After a mute confession , communion was administered to the dying man , preparations made for the sacrament of unction , and in his house there was the bustle and thrill of suspense usual at such moments .
Outside the house , beyond the gates , a group of undertakers , who hid whenever a carriage drove up , waited in expectation of an important order for an expensive funeral .
The magnificent reception room was crowded .
Prince Vas'ili , who had grown thinner and paler during the last few days , escorted him to the door , repeating something to him several times in low tones .
" The limits of human life ... are fixed and may not be o'erpassed , " said an old priest to a lady who had taken a seat beside him and was listening na"ively to his words .
" I wonder , is it not too late to administer unction ? " asked the lady , adding the priest 's clerical title , as if she had no opinion of her own on the subject .
" Ah , madam , it is a great sacrament , " replied the priest , passing his hand over the thin grizzled strands of hair combed back across his bald head .
" Who was that ?
The Military Governor himself ?
" was being asked at the other side of the room . "
How young - looking he is ! "
" Yes , and he is over sixty .
I hear the count no longer recognizes anyone .
They wished to administer the sacrament of unction . "
" I knew someone who received that sacrament seven times . "
" Beautiful , " said the doctor in answer to a remark about the weather .
" The weather is beautiful , Princess ; and besides , in Moscow one feels as if one were in the country . "
" Yes , indeed , " replied the princess with a sigh . "
So he may have something to drink ? "
Lorrain considered .
" Has he taken his medicine ? "
" Yes . "
The doctor glanced at his watch .
" Take a glass of boiled water and put a pinch of cream of tartar , " and he indicated with his delicate fingers what he meant by a pinch .
" Dere has neffer been a gase , " a German doctor was saying to an aide - de - camp , " dat one liffs after de sird stroke . "
" And what a well - preserved man he was ! "
remarked the aide - de - camp . "
And who will inherit his wealth ?
" he added in a whisper .
" It von't go begging , " replied the German with a smile .
Everyone again looked toward the door , which creaked as the second princess went in with the drink she had prepared according to Lorrain 's instructions .
The German doctor went up to Lorrain .
" Do you think he can last till morning ? " asked the German , addressing Lorrain in French which he pronounced badly .
Lorrain , pursing up his lips , waved a severely negative finger before his nose .
" Tonight , not later , " said he in a low voice , and he moved away with a decorous smile of self - satisfaction at being able clearly to understand and state the patient 's condition .
Meanwhile Prince Vas'ili had opened the door into the princess ' room .
In this room it was almost dark ; only two tiny lamps were burning before the icons and there was a pleasant scent of flowers and burnt pastilles .
The room was crowded with small pieces of furniture , whatnots , cupboards , and little tables .
The quilt of a high , white feather bed was just visible behind a screen .
A small dog began to bark .
" Ah , is it you , cousin ? "
She rose and smoothed her hair , which was as usual so extremely smooth that it seemed to be made of one piece with her head and covered with varnish .
" Has anything happened ?
" she asked .
" I am so terrified . "
" No , there is no change .
I only came to have a talk about business , Catiche , " * muttered the prince , seating himself wearily on the chair she had just vacated .
" You have made the place warm , I must say , " he remarked . "
Well , sit down :
let 's have a talk . "
* Catherine .
" I thought perhaps something had happened , " she said with her unchanging stonily severe expression ; and , sitting down opposite the prince , she prepared to listen .
" I wished to get a nap , mon cousin , but I ca n't . "
" Well , my dear ? " said Prince Vas'ili , taking her hand and bending it downwards as was his habit .
It was plain that this " well ? " referred to much that they both understood without naming .
The princess , who had a straight , rigid body , abnormally long for her legs , looked directly at Prince Vas'ili with no sign of emotion in her prominent gray eyes .
Then she shook her head and glanced up at the icons with a sigh .
This might have been taken as an expression of sorrow and devotion , or of weariness and hope of resting before long .
Prince Vas'ili understood it as an expression of weariness .
" And I ? "
he said ; " do you think it is easier for me ?
I am as worn out as a post horse , but still I must have a talk with you , Catiche , a very serious talk . "
His eyes too seemed strange ; at one moment they looked impudently sly and at the next glanced round in alarm .
One must think of the future , of all of you ...
I love you all , like children of my own , as you know . "
The princess continued to look at him without moving , and with the same dull expression .
" And then of course my family has also to be considered , " Prince Vas'ili went on , testily pushing away a little table without looking at her . "
You know , Catiche , that we - you three sisters , M'amontov , and my wife - are the count 's only direct heirs .
I know , I know how hard it is for you to talk or think of such matters .
It is no easier for me ; but , my dear , I am getting on for sixty and must be prepared for anything .
Do you know I have sent for Pierre ?
The count , " pointing to his portrait , " definitely demanded that he should be called . "
Prince Vas'ili looked questioningly at the princess , but could not make out whether she was considering what he had just said or whether she was simply looking at him .
" Yes , yes , of course , " interrupted Prince Vas'ili impatiently , rubbing his bald head and angrily pulling back toward him the little table that he had pushed away . "
But ... in short , the fact is ... you know yourself that last winter the count made a will by which he left all his property , not to us his direct heirs , but to Pierre . "
" He has made wills enough ! " quietly remarked the princess . "
But he can not leave the estate to Pierre .
Pierre is illegitimate . "
Do you understand that in consideration of the count 's services , his request would be granted ? ... "
The princess smiled as people do who think they know more about the subject under discussion than those they are talking with .
" I can tell you more , " continued Prince Vas'ili , seizing her hand , " that letter was written , though it was not sent , and the Emperor knew of it .
The only question is , has it been destroyed or not ?
Pierre will get everything as the legitimate son . "
" And our share ? " asked the princess smiling ironically , as if anything might happen , only not that .
" But , my poor Catiche , it is as clear as daylight !
He will then be the legal heir to everything and you wo n't get anything .
You must know , my dear , whether the will and letter were written , and whether they have been destroyed or not .
And if they have somehow been overlooked , you ought to know where they are , and must find them , because ... "
" What next ? " the princess interrupted , smiling sardonically and not changing the expression of her eyes .
" I am a woman , and you think we are all stupid ; but I know this : an illegitimate son can not inherit ... un b^atard ! "
* she added , as if supposing that this translation of the word would effectively prove to Prince Vas'ili the invalidity of his contention .
* A bastard .
" Well , really , Catiche !
Ca n't you understand !
And if the will and letter are not destroyed , then you will have nothing but the consolation of having been dutiful et
tout ce
qui s'ensuit !
*
That 's certain . "
*
And all that follows therefrom .
If you do n't believe me , then believe an expert .
I have just been talking to Dm'itri On'ufrich " ( the family solicitor ) " and he says the same . "
" That would be a fine thing ! " said she .
" I never wanted anything and I do n't now . "
She pushed the little dog off her lap and smoothed her dress .
" And this is gratitude - this is recognition for those who have sacrificed everything for his sake ! "
she cried .
" It 's splendid !
Fine !
I do n't want anything , Prince . "
" Yes , but you are not the only one .
There are your sisters ... " replied Prince Vas'ili .
But the princess did not listen to him .
" Yes , I knew it long ago but had forgotten .
I knew that I could expect nothing but meanness , deceit , envy , intrigue , and ingratitude - the blackest ingratitude - in this house ... "
" Do you or do you not know where that will is ? " insisted Prince Vas'ili , his cheeks twitching more than ever .
" Yes , I was a fool !
I still believed in people , loved them , and sacrificed myself .
But only the base , the vile succeed !
I know who has been intriguing ! "
The princess wished to rise , but the prince held her by the hand .
She had the air of one who has suddenly lost faith in the whole human race .
She gave her companion an angry glance .
" There is still time , my dear .
You must remember , Catiche , that it was all done casually in a moment of anger , of illness , and was afterwards forgotten .
" Who sacrificed everything for him , " chimed in the princess , who would again have risen had not the prince still held her fast , " though he never could appreciate it .
No , mon cousin , " she added with a sigh , " I shall always remember that in this world one must expect no reward , that in this world there is neither honor nor justice .
In this world one has to be cunning and cruel . "
" Now come , come !
Be reasonable .
I know your excellent heart . "
" No , I have a wicked heart . "
" I know your heart , " repeated the prince .
" I value your friendship and wish you to have as good an opinion of me .
Do n't upset yourself , and let us talk sensibly while there is still time , be it a day or be it but an hour ....
Tell me all you know about the will , and above all where it is .
You must know .
We will take it at once and show it to the count .
He has , no doubt , forgotten it and will wish to destroy it .
You understand that my sole desire is conscientiously to carry out his wishes ; that is my only reason for being here .
I came simply to help him and you . "
" Now I see it all !
I know who has been intriguing - I know ! " cried the princess .
" That 's not the point , my dear . "
" It 's that prot'eg'e of yours , that sweet Princess Drubetsk'aya , that Anna Mikh'aylovna whom I would not take for a housemaid ...
the infamous , vile woman ! "
" Do not let us lose any time ... "
" Ah , do n't talk to me !
I know it was then he wrote this vile , infamous paper , but I thought the thing was invalid . "
" We 've got to it at last - why did you not tell me about it sooner ? "
" It 's in the inlaid portfolio that he keeps under his pillow , " said the princess , ignoring his question .
" Now I know !
Yes ; if I have a sin , a great sin , it is hatred of that vile woman ! "
almost shrieked the princess , now quite changed . "
And what does she come worming herself in here for ?
But I will give her a piece of my mind .
The time will come ! "
CHAPTER XXII
As the wheels rolled softly over the straw beneath the windows , Anna Mikh'aylovna , having turned with words of comfort to her companion , realized that he was asleep in his corner and woke him up .
Rousing himself , Pierre followed Anna Mikh'aylovna out of the carriage , and only then began to think of the interview with his dying father which awaited him .
He noticed that they had not come to the front entrance but to the back door .
While he was getting down from the carriage steps two men , who looked like tradespeople , ran hurriedly from the entrance and hid in the shadow of the wall .
Pausing for a moment , Pierre noticed several other men of the same kind hiding in the shadow of the house on both sides .
But neither Anna Mikh'aylovna nor the footman nor the coachman , who could not help seeing these people , took any notice of them .
" It seems to be all right , " Pierre concluded , and followed Anna Mikh'aylovna .
She hurriedly ascended the narrow dimly lit stone staircase , calling to Pierre , who was lagging behind , to follow .
Halfway up the stairs they were almost knocked over by some men who , carrying pails , came running downstairs , their boots clattering .
These men pressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna Mikh'aylovna pass and did not evince the least surprise at seeing them there .
" Is this the way to the princesses ' apartments ? " asked Anna Mikh'aylovna of one of them .
" Yes , " replied a footman in a bold loud voice , as if anything were now permissible ; " the door to the left , ma'am . "
" Perhaps the count did not ask for me , " said Pierre when he reached the landing .
" I 'd better go to my own room . "
Anna Mikh'aylovna paused and waited for him to come up .
" Ah , my friend ! "
she said , touching his arm as she had done her son 's when speaking to him that afternoon , " believe me I suffer no less than you do , but be a man ! "
" But really , had n't I better go away ? " he asked , looking kindly at her over his spectacles .
" Ah , my dear friend !
Forget the wrongs that may have been done you .
Think that he is your father ... perhaps in the agony of death . "
She sighed .
" I have loved you like a son from the first .
Trust yourself to me , Pierre .
I shall not forget your interests . "
Pierre did not understand a word , but the conviction that all this had to be grew stronger , and he meekly followed Anna Mikh'aylovna who was already opening a door .
This door led into a back anteroom .
An old man , a servant of the princesses , sat in a corner knitting a stocking .
Pierre had never been in this part of the house and did not even know of the existence of these rooms .
The first door on the left led into the princesses ' apartments .
Seeing them pass , Prince Vas'ili drew back with obvious impatience , while the princess jumped up and with a gesture of desperation slammed the door with all her might .
This action was so unlike her usual composure and the fear depicted on Prince Vas'ili 's face so out of keeping with his dignity that Pierre stopped and glanced inquiringly over his spectacles at his guide .
Anna Mikh'aylovna evinced no surprise , she only smiled faintly and sighed , as if to say that this was no more than she had expected .
" Be a man , my friend .
I will look after your interests , " said she in reply to his look , and went still faster along the passage .
Pierre could not make out what it was all about , and still less what " watching over his interests " meant , but he decided that all these things had to be .
From the passage they went into a large , dimly lit room adjoining the count 's reception room .
It was one of those sumptuous but cold apartments known to Pierre only from the front approach , but even in this room there now stood an empty bath , and water had been spilled on the carpet .
They were met by a deacon with a censer and by a servant who passed out on tiptoe without heeding them .
They went into the reception room familiar to Pierre , with two Italian windows opening into the conservatory , with its large bust and full length portrait of Catherine the Great .
The same people were still sitting here in almost the same positions as before , whispering to one another .
All became silent and turned to look at the pale tear - worn Anna Mikh'aylovna as she entered , and at the big stout figure of Pierre who , hanging his head , meekly followed her .
Anna Mikh'aylovna 's face expressed a consciousness that the decisive moment had arrived .
With the air of a practical Petersburg lady she now , keeping Pierre close beside her , entered the room even more boldly than that afternoon .
She felt that as she brought with her the person the dying man wished to see , her own admission was assured .
" God be thanked that you are in time , " said she to one of the priests ; " all we relatives have been in such anxiety .
This young man is the count 's son , " she added more softly .
" What a terrible moment ! "
Having said this she went up to the doctor .
" Dear doctor , " said she , " this young man is the count 's son .
Is there any hope ? "
The doctor cast a rapid glance upwards and silently shrugged his shoulders .
Anna Mikh'aylovna with just the same movement raised her shoulders and eyes , almost closing the latter , sighed , and moved away from the doctor to Pierre .
To him , in a particularly respectful and tenderly sad voice , she said :
Pierre , having made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly , moved toward the sofa she had indicated .
As soon as Anna Mikh'aylovna had disappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turned to him with something more than curiosity and sympathy .
He noticed that they whispered to one another , casting significant looks at him with a kind of awe and even servility .
A deference such as he had never before received was shown him .
Not two minutes had passed before Prince Vas'ili with head erect majestically entered the room .
He was wearing his long coat with three stars on his breast .
He seemed to have grown thinner since the morning ; his eyes seemed larger than usual when he glanced round and noticed Pierre .
He went up to him , took his hand ( a thing he never used to do ) , and drew it downwards as if wishing to ascertain whether it was firmly fixed on .
" Courage , courage , my friend !
He has asked to see you .
That is well ! "
and he turned to go .
" He had another stroke about half an hour ago .
Courage , my friend ... "
Pierre 's mind was in such a confused state that the word " stroke " suggested to him a blow from something .
He looked at Prince Vas'ili in perplexity , and only later grasped that a stroke was an attack of illness .
Prince Vas'ili said something to Lorrain in passing and went through the door on tiptoe .
He could not walk well on tiptoe and his whole body jerked at each step .
The eldest princess followed him , and the priests and deacons and some servants also went in at the door .
" The divine mercy is inexhaustible !
Unction is about to be administered .
Come . "
CHAPTER XXIII
Pierre well knew this large room divided by columns and an arch , its walls hung round with Persian carpets .
He lay just under the icons ; his large thick hands outside the quilt .
Into the right hand , which was lying palm downwards , a wax taper had been thrust between forefinger and thumb , and an old servant , bending over from behind the chair , held it in position .
By the chair stood the priests , their long hair falling over their magnificent glittering vestments , with lighted tapers in their hands , slowly and solemnly conducting the service .
Anna Mikh'aylovna , with a meek , sorrowful , and all - forgiving expression on her face , stood by the door near the strange lady .
His face wore a calm look of piety and resignation to the will of God . "
If you do not understand these sentiments , " he seemed to be saying , " so much the worse for you ! "
Behind him stood the aide - de - camp , the doctors , and the menservants ; the men and women had separated as in church .
Anna Mikh'aylovna , with an air of importance that showed that she felt she quite knew what she was about , went across the room to where Pierre was standing and gave him a taper .
He lit it and , distracted by observing those around him , began crossing himself with the hand that held the taper .
Sophie , the rosy , laughter - loving , youngest princess with the mole , watched him .
She smiled , hid her face in her handkerchief , and remained with it hidden for awhile ; then looking up and seeing Pierre she again began to laugh .
She evidently felt unable to look at him without laughing , but could not resist looking at him : so to be out of temptation she slipped quietly behind one of the columns .
In the midst of the service the voices of the priests suddenly ceased , they whispered to one another , and the old servant who was holding the count 's hand got up and said something to the ladies .
Anna Mikh'aylovna stepped forward and , stooping over the dying man , beckoned to Lorrain from behind her back .
The sick man was given something to drink , there was a stir around him , then the people resumed their places and the service continued .
On leaving the bed both Prince Vas'ili and the princess passed out by a back door , but returned to their places one after the other before the service was concluded .
Pierre paid no more attention to this occurrence than to the rest of what went on , having made up his mind once for all that what he saw happening around him that evening was in some way essential .
The chanting of the service ceased , and the voice of the priest was heard respectfully congratulating the dying man on having received the sacrament .
The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable as before .
Around him everyone began to stir : steps were audible and whispers , among which Anna Mikh'aylovna 's was the most distinct .
Pierre heard her say :
" Certainly he must be moved onto the bed ; here it will be impossible ... "
He judged by the cautious movements of those who crowded round the invalid chair that they had lifted the dying man and were moving him .
" Catch hold of my arm or you 'll drop him !
" he heard one of the servants say in a frightened whisper . "
Catch hold from underneath .
Here ! " exclaimed different voices ; and the heavy breathing of the bearers and the shuffling of their feet grew more hurried , as if the weight they were carrying were too much for them .
This head , with its remarkably broad brow and cheekbones , its handsome , sensual mouth , and its cold , majestic expression , was not disfigured by the approach of death .
It was the same as Pierre remembered it three months before , when the count had sent him to Petersburg .
But now this head was swaying helplessly with the uneven movements of the bearers , and the cold listless gaze fixed itself upon nothing .
After a few minutes ' bustle beside the high bedstead , those who had carried the sick man dispersed .
Anna Mikh'aylovna touched Pierre 's hand and said , " Come . "
Pierre went with her to the bed on which the sick man had been laid in a stately pose in keeping with the ceremony just completed .
He lay with his head propped high on the pillows .
His hands were symmetrically placed on the green silk quilt , the palms downward .
When Pierre came up the count was gazing straight at him , but with a look the significance of which could not be understood by mortal man .
Either this look meant nothing but that as long as one has eyes they must look somewhere , or it meant too much .
Pierre hesitated , not knowing what to do , and glanced inquiringly at his guide .
Anna Mikh'aylovna made a hurried sign with her eyes , glancing at the sick man 's hand and moving her lips as if to send it a kiss .
Pierre , carefully stretching his neck so as not to touch the quilt , followed her suggestion and pressed his lips to the large boned , fleshy hand .
Neither the hand nor a single muscle of the count 's face stirred .
Once more Pierre looked questioningly at Anna Mikh'aylovna to see what he was to do next .
Anna Mikh'aylovna with her eyes indicated a chair that stood beside the bed .
Pierre obediently sat down , his eyes asking if he were doing right .
Anna Mikh'aylovna nodded approvingly .
Again Pierre fell into the na"ively symmetrical pose of an Egyptian statue , evidently distressed that his stout and clumsy body took up so much room and doing his utmost to look as small as possible .
He looked at the count , who still gazed at the spot where Pierre 's face had been before he sat down .
Anna Mikh'aylovna indicated by her attitude her consciousness of the pathetic importance of these last moments of meeting between the father and son .
This lasted about two minutes , which to Pierre seemed an hour .
Suddenly the broad muscles and lines of the count 's face began to twitch .
The twitching increased , the handsome mouth was drawn to one side ( only now did Pierre realize how near death his father was ) , and from that distorted mouth issued an indistinct , hoarse sound .
The eyes and face of the sick man showed impatience .
He made an effort to look at the servant who stood constantly at the head of the bed .
" Wants to turn on the other side , " whispered the servant , and got up to turn the count 's heavy body toward the wall .
Pierre rose to help him .
While the count was being turned over , one of his arms fell back helplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward .
At sight of this smile Pierre felt an unexpected quivering in his breast and a tickling in his nose , and tears dimmed his eyes .
The sick man was turned on to his side with his face to the wall .
He sighed .
" He is dozing , " said Anna Mikh'aylovna , observing that one of the princesses was coming to take her turn at watching .
" Let us go . "
Pierre went out .
CHAPTER XXIV
There was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vas'ili and the eldest princess , who were sitting under the portrait of Catherine the Great and talking eagerly .
As soon as they saw Pierre and his companion they became silent , and Pierre thought he saw the princess hide something as she whispered :
" I ca n't bear the sight of that woman . "
" Catiche has had tea served in the small drawing room , " said Prince Vas'ili to Anna Mikh'aylovna .
" Go and take something , my poor Anna Mikh'aylovna , or you will not hold out . "
To Pierre he said nothing , merely giving his arm a sympathetic squeeze below the shoulder .
Pierre went with Anna Mikh'aylovna into the small drawing room .
Around the table all who were at Count Bez'ukhov 's house that night had gathered to fortify themselves .
Pierre well remembered this small circular drawing room with its mirrors and little tables .
Now this same room was dimly lighted by two candles .
Pierre did not eat anything though he would very much have liked to .
He looked inquiringly at his monitress and saw that she was again going on tiptoe to the reception room where they had left Prince Vas'ili and the eldest princess .
Pierre concluded that this also was essential , and after a short interval followed her .
Anna Mikh'aylovna was standing beside the princess , and they were both speaking in excited whispers .
Worldly conversation at a moment when his soul is already prepared ... "
Prince Vas'ili was seated in an easy chair in his familiar attitude , with one leg crossed high above the other .
His cheeks , which were so flabby that they looked heavier below , were twitching violently ; but he wore the air of a man little concerned in what the two ladies were saying .
" Come , my dear Anna Mikh'aylovna , let Catiche do as she pleases .
You know how fond the count is of her . "
" I do n't even know what is in this paper , " said the younger of the two ladies , addressing Prince Vas'ili and pointing to an inlaid portfolio she held in her hand .
"
All I know is that his real will is in his writing table , and this is a paper he has forgotten .... "
She tried to pass Anna Mikh'aylovna , but the latter sprang so as to bar her path .
" I know , my dear , kind princess , " said Anna Mikh'aylovna , seizing the portfolio so firmly that it was plain
she would not let go easily . "
Dear princess , I beg and implore you , have some pity on him !
Je vous en conjure ... "
The princess did not reply .
Their efforts in the struggle for the portfolio were the only sounds audible , but it was evident that if the princess did speak , her words would not be flattering to Anna Mikh'aylovna .
Though the latter held on tenaciously , her voice lost none of its honeyed firmness and softness .
" Pierre , my dear , come here .
I think he will not be out of place in a family consultation ; is it not so , Prince ? "
" Why do n't you speak , cousin ? " suddenly shrieked the princess so loud that those in the drawing room heard her and were startled . "
Why do you remain silent when heaven knows who permits herself to interfere , making a scene on the very threshold of a dying man 's room ?
Intriguer !
" she hissed viciously , and tugged with all her might at the portfolio .
But Anna Mikh'aylovna went forward a step or two to keep her hold on the portfolio , and changed her grip .
Prince Vas'ili rose . "
Oh ! " said he with reproach and surprise , " this is absurd !
Come , let go I tell you . "
The princess let go .
" And you too ! "
But Anna Mikh'aylovna did not obey him .
" Let go , I tell you !
I will take the responsibility .
I myself will go and ask him , I ! ...
does that satisfy you ? "
" But , Prince , " said Anna Mikh'aylovna , " after such a solemn sacrament , allow him a moment 's peace !
" Remember that you will answer for the consequences , " said Prince Vas'ili severely .
" You do n't know what you are doing . "
" Vile woman ! " shouted the princess , darting unexpectedly at Anna Mikh'aylovna and snatching the portfolio from her .
Prince Vas'ili bent his head and spread out his hands .
" What are you doing ! " she cried vehemently . "
He is dying and you leave me alone with him ! "
Her sister dropped the portfolio .
Anna Mikh'aylovna , stooping , quickly caught up the object of contention and ran into the bedroom .
The eldest princess and Prince Vas'ili , recovering themselves , followed her .
A few minutes later the eldest sister came out with a pale hard face , again biting her underlip .
At sight of Pierre her expression showed an irrepressible hatred .
" Yes , now you may be glad ! "
said she ; " this is what you have been waiting for . "
And bursting into tears she hid her face in her handkerchief and rushed from the room .
Prince Vas'ili came next .
He staggered to the sofa on which Pierre was sitting and dropped onto it , covering his face with his hand .
Pierre noticed that he was pale and that his jaw quivered and shook as if in an ague .
" Ah , my friend ! " said he , taking Pierre by the elbow ; and there was in his voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed in it before . "
How often we sin , how much we deceive , and all for what ?
I am near sixty , dear friend ...
I too ...
All will end in death , all !
Death is awful ... " and he burst into tears .
Anna Mikh'aylovna came out last .
She approached Pierre with slow , quiet steps .
" Pierre ! "
she said .
Pierre gave her an inquiring look .
She kissed the young man on his forehead , wetting him with her tears .
Then after a pause she said :
" He is no more .... "
Pierre looked at her over his spectacles .
" Come , I will go with you .
Try to weep , nothing gives such relief as tears . "
She led him into the dark drawing room and Pierre was glad no one could see his face .
Anna Mikh'aylovna left him , and when she returned he was fast asleep with his head on his arm .
In the morning Anna Mikh'aylovna said to Pierre :
" Yes , my dear , this is a great loss for us all , not to speak of you .
But God will support you : you are young , and are now , I hope , in command of an immense fortune .
The will has not yet been opened .
I know you well enough to be sure that this will not turn your head , but it imposes duties on you , and you must be a man . "
Pierre was silent .
" Perhaps later on I may tell you , my dear boy , that if I had not been there , God only knows what would have happened !
You know , Uncle promised me only the day before yesterday not to forget Bor'is .
But he had no time .
I hope , my dear friend , you will carry out your father 's wish ? "
Pierre understood nothing of all this and coloring shyly looked in silence at Princess Anna Mikh'aylovna .
After her talk with Pierre , Anna Mikh'aylovna returned to the Rost'ovs ' and went to bed .
On waking in the morning she told the Rost'ovs and all her acquaintances the details of Count Bez'ukhov 's death .
She said the count had died as she would herself wish to die , that his end was not only touching but edifying .
" It is painful , but it does one good .
It uplifts the soul to see such men as the old count and his worthy son , " said she .
Of the behavior of the eldest princess and Prince Vas'ili she spoke disapprovingly , but in whispers and as a great secret .
CHAPTER XXV
He used to say that there are only two sources of human vice - idleness and superstition , and only two virtues - activity and intelligence .
He was himself always occupied : writing his memoirs , solving problems in higher mathematics , turning snuffboxes on a lathe , working in the garden , or superintending the building that was always going on at his estate .
As regularity is a prime condition facilitating activity , regularity in his household was carried to the highest point of exactitude .
He always came to table under precisely the same conditions , and not only at the same hour but at the same minute .
On the morning of the day that the young couple were to arrive , Princess Mary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed for the morning greeting , crossing herself with trepidation and repeating a silent prayer .
Every morning she came in like that , and every morning prayed that the daily interview might pass off well .
An old powdered manservant who was sitting in the antechamber rose quietly and said in a whisper : " Please walk in . "
Through the door came the regular hum of a lathe .
The princess timidly opened the door which moved noiselessly and easily .
She paused at the entrance .
The prince was working at the lathe and after glancing round continued his work .
The enormous study was full of things evidently in constant use .
He never gave his children a blessing , so he simply held out his bristly cheek ( as yet unshaven ) and , regarding her tenderly and attentively , said severely :
" Quite well ?
All right then , sit down . "
He took the exercise book containing lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up a chair with his foot .
" For tomorrow ! " said he , quickly finding the page and making a scratch from one paragraph to another with his hard nail .
The princess bent over the exercise book on the table .
At the sight of the letter red patches showed themselves on the princess ' face .
She took it quickly and bent her head over it .
" From H'elo"ise ? " asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his still sound , yellowish teeth .
" Yes , it 's from Julie , " replied the princess with a timid glance and a timid smile .
" I 'll let two more letters pass , but the third I 'll read , " said the prince sternly ; " I 'm afraid you write much nonsense .
I 'll read the third ! "
" Read this if you like , Father , " said the princess , blushing still more and holding out the letter .
" The third , I said the third ! "
cried the prince abruptly , pushing the letter away , and leaning his elbows on the table he drew toward him the exercise book containing geometrical figures .
Now , madam , these triangles are equal ; please note that the angle ABC ... "
Whether it was the teacher 's fault or the pupil 's , this same thing happened every day :
The princess gave a wrong answer .
He drew up his chair , and continued to explain .
I do n't want to have you like our silly ladies .
Get used to it and you 'll like it , " and he patted her cheek .
" It will drive all the nonsense out of your head . "
She turned to go , but he stopped her with a gesture and took an uncut book from the high desk .
" Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your H'elo"ise has sent you .
Religious !
I do n't interfere with anyone 's belief ...
I have looked at it .
Take it .
Well , now go .
Go . "
He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her .
Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad , scared expression that rarely left her and which made her plain , sickly face yet plainer .
She sat down at her writing table , on which stood miniature portraits and which was littered with books and papers .
The princess was as untidy as her father was tidy .
She put down the geometry book and eagerly broke the seal of her letter .
It was from her most intimate friend from childhood ; that same Julie Kar'agina who had been at the Rost'ovs ' name - day party .
Julie wrote in French :
Dear and precious Friend , How terrible and frightful a thing is separation !
I can not overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been in my heart ever since we parted .
Why are we not together as we were last summer , in your big study , on the blue sofa , the confidential sofa ?
Having read thus far , Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirror which stood on her right .
It reflected a weak , ungraceful figure and thin face .
Her eyes , always sad , now looked with particular hopelessness at her reflection in the glass . "
She flatters me , " thought the princess , turning away and continuing to read .
they gave her an attraction more powerful than that of beauty .
But the princess never saw the beautiful expression of her own eyes - the look they had when she was not thinking of herself .
As with everyone , her face assumed a forced unnatural expression as soon as she looked in a glass .
She went on reading :
All Moscow talks of nothing but war .
One of my two brothers is already abroad , the other is with the Guards , who are starting on their march to the frontier .
Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg and it is thought intends to expose his precious person to the chances of war .
God grant that the Corsican monster who is destroying the peace of Europe may be overthrown by the angel whom it has pleased the Almighty , in His goodness , to give us as sovereign !
To say nothing of my brothers , this war has deprived me of one of the associations nearest my heart .
I mean young Nicholas Rost'ov , who with his enthusiasm could not bear to remain inactive and has left the university to join the army .
I will confess to you , dear Mary , that in spite of his extreme youth his departure for the army was a great grief to me .
He is so pure and poetic that my relations with him , transient as they were , have been one of the sweetest comforts to my poor heart , which has already suffered so much .
Someday I will tell you about our parting and all that was said then .
That is still too fresh .
Ah , dear friend , you are happy not to know these poignant joys and sorrows .
You are fortunate , for the latter are generally the stronger !
I know very well that Count Nicholas is too young ever to be more to me than a friend , but this sweet friendship , this poetic and pure intimacy , were what my heart needed .
But enough of this !
The chief news , about which all Moscow gossips , is the death of old Count Bez'ukhov , and his inheritance .
Fancy !
It is rumored that Prince Vas'ili played a very despicable part in this affair and that he returned to Petersburg quite crestfallen .
But you will understand that I have no desire for the post .
` A propos of marriages :
do you know that a while ago that universal auntie
Anna Mikh'aylovna told me , under the seal of strict secrecy , of a plan of marriage for you .
I do n't know what you will think of it , but I consider it my duty to let you know of it .
He is said to be very handsome and a terrible scapegrace .
That is all I have been able to find out about him .
But enough of gossip .
I am at the end of my second sheet of paper , and Mamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apr'aksins ' .
Read the mystical book I am sending you ; it has an enormous success here .
Though there are things in it difficult for the feeble human mind to grasp , it is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul .
Adieu !
Give my respects to monsieur your father and my compliments to Mademoiselle Bourienne .
I embrace you as I love you .
JULIE
P.S. Let me have news of your brother and his charming little wife .
The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smile and her luminous eyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed .
Then she suddenly rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table .
She took a sheet of paper and her hand moved rapidly over it .
This is the reply she wrote , also in French :
Dear and precious Friend , Your letter of the 13th has given me great delight .
So you still love me , my romantic Julie ?
Separation , of which you say so much that is bad , does not seem to have had its usual effect on you .
You complain of our separation .
What then should I say , if I dared complain , I who am deprived of all who are dear to me ?
Ah , if we had not religion to console us life would be very sad .
Why do you suppose that I should look severely on your affection for that young man ?
On such matters I am only severe with myself .
I understand such feelings in others , and if never having felt them I can not approve of them , neither do I condemn them .
The news of Count Bez'ukhov 's death reached us before your letter and my father was much affected by it .
God preserve us from that terrible misfortune !
I can not agree with you about Pierre , whom I knew as a child .
He always seemed to me to have an excellent heart , and that is the quality I value most in people .
As to his inheritance and the part played by Prince Vas'ili , it is very sad for both .
I pity Prince Vas'ili but am still more sorry for Pierre .
So young , and burdened with such riches - to what temptations he will be exposed !
If I were asked what I desire most on earth , it would be to be poorer than the poorest beggar .
A thousand thanks , dear friend , for the volume you have sent me and which has such success in Moscow .
I never could understand the fondness some people have for confusing their minds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken their doubts and excite their imagination , giving them a bent for exaggeration quite contrary to Christian simplicity .
Let us rather read the Epistles and Gospels .
Let us rather confine ourselves to studying those sublime rules which our divine Saviour has left for our guidance here below .
My father has not spoken to me of a suitor , but has only told me that he has received a letter and is expecting a visit from Prince Vas'ili .
In regard to this project of marriage for me , I will tell you , dear sweet friend , that I look on marriage as a divine institution to which we must conform .
However painful it may be to me , should the Almighty lay the duties of wife and mother upon me
I shall try to perform them as faithfully as I can , without disquieting myself by examining my feelings toward him whom He may give me for husband .
I have had a letter from my brother , who announces his speedy arrival at Bald Hills with his wife .
This pleasure will be but a brief one , however , for he will leave us again to take part in this unhappy war into which we have been drawn , God knows how or why .
My father talks of nothing but marches and countermarches , things of which I understand nothing ; and the day before yesterday during my daily walk through the village I witnessed a heartrending scene ....
It was a convoy of conscripts enrolled from our people and starting to join the army .
You should have seen the state of the mothers , wives , and children of the men who were going and should have heard the sobs .
It seems as though mankind has forgotten the laws of its divine Saviour , Who preached love and forgiveness of injuries - and that men attribute the greatest merit to skill in killing one another .
Adieu , dear and kind friend ; may our divine Saviour and His most Holy Mother keep you in their holy and all - powerful care !
MARY
" Ah , you are sending off a letter , Princess ?
I have already dispatched mine .
I have written to my poor mother , " said the smiling Mademoiselle Bourienne rapidly , in her pleasant mellow tones and with guttural r 's .
She brought into Princess Mary 's strenuous , mournful , and gloomy world a quite different atmosphere , careless , lighthearted , and self - satisfied .
" Princess , I must warn you , " she added , lowering her voice and evidently listening to herself with pleasure , and speaking with exaggerated grasseyement , " the prince has been scolding Michael Iv'anovich .
He is in a very bad humor , very morose .
Be prepared . "
" Ah , dear friend , " replied Princess Mary , " I have asked you never to warn me of the humor my father is in .
I do not allow myself to judge him and would not have others do so . "
The princess glanced at her watch and , seeing that she was five minutes late in starting her practice on the clavichord , went into the sitting room with a look of alarm .
Between twelve and two o'clock , as the day was mapped out , the prince rested and the princess played the clavichord .
CHAPTER XXVI
The gray - haired valet was sitting drowsily listening to the snoring of the prince , who was in his large study .
From the far side of the house through the closed doors came the sound of difficult passages - twenty times repeated - of a sonata by Dussek .
Just then a closed carriage and another with a hood drove up to the porch .
Prince Andrew got out of the carriage , helped his little wife to alight , and let her pass into the house before him .
Old T'ikhon , wearing a wig , put his head out of the door of the antechamber , reported in a whisper that the prince was sleeping , and hastily closed the door .
T'ikhon knew that neither the son 's arrival nor any other unusual event must be allowed to disturb the appointed order of the day .
" He will get up in twenty minutes .
Let us go across to Mary 's room , " he said .
The little princess had grown stouter during this time , but her eyes and her short , downy , smiling lip lifted when she began to speak just as merrily and prettily as ever .
" Why , this is a palace ! "
she said to her husband , looking around with the expression with which people compliment their host at a ball . "
Let 's come , quick , quick ! "
And with a glance round , she smiled at T'ikhon , at her husband , and at the footman who accompanied them .
" Is that Mary practicing ?
Let 's go quietly and take her by surprise . "
Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression .
" You 've grown older , T'ikhon , " he said in passing to the old man , who kissed his hand .
Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichord came , the pretty , fair - haired Frenchwoman , Mademoiselle Bourienne , rushed out apparently beside herself with delight .
" Ah ! what joy for the princess ! "
exclaimed she : "
At last !
I must let her know . "
" No , no , please not ... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne , " said the little princess , kissing her .
" I know you already through my sister - in - law 's friendship for you .
She was not expecting us ? "
They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came the sound of the oft - repeated passage of the sonata .
Prince Andrew stopped and made a grimace , as if expecting something unpleasant .
The little princess entered the room .
The passage broke off in the middle , a cry was heard , then
Princess Mary 's heavy tread and the sound of kissing .
Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressing her hand to her heart , with a beatific smile and obviously equally ready to cry or to laugh .
Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders and frowned , as lovers of music do when they hear a false note .
Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to cry .
Prince Andrew evidently felt ill at ease , but to the two women it seemed quite natural that they should cry , and apparently it never entered their heads that it could have been otherwise at this meeting .
" Ah ! my dear ! ...
Ah !
Mary ! ...
" they suddenly exclaimed , and then laughed .
" I dreamed last night ...
"-"You were not expecting us ? ... " "
Ah !
Mary , you have got thinner ? ... "
" And you have grown stouter ! ... "
" I knew the princess at once , " put in Mademoiselle Bourienne .
" And I had no idea ! ...
" exclaimed Princess Mary . "
Ah , Andrew , I did not see you . "
Prince Andrew and his sister , hand in hand , kissed one another , and he told her she was still the same crybaby as ever .
Princess Mary had turned toward her brother , and through her tears the loving , warm , gentle look of her large luminous eyes , very beautiful at that moment , rested on Prince Andrew 's face .
Princess Mary was still looking silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were full of love and sadness .
It was plain that she was following a train of thought independent of her sister - in - law 's words .
In the midst of a description of the last Petersburg fete
she addressed her brother :
" So you are really going to the war , Andrew ? " she said sighing .
Lise sighed too .
" Yes , and even tomorrow , " replied her brother .
" He is leaving me here , God knows why , when he might have had promotion ... "
Princess Mary did not listen to the end , but continuing her train of thought turned to her sister - in - law with a tender glance at her figure .
" Is it certain ?
" she said .
The face of the little princess changed .
She sighed and said : " Yes , quite certain .
Ah !
it is very dreadful ... "
Her lip descended .
She brought her face close to her sister - in - law 's and unexpectedly again began to cry .
" She needs rest , " said Prince Andrew with a frown .
" Do n't you , Lise ?
Take her to your room
and I 'll go to Father .
How is he ?
Just the same ? "
" Yes , just the same .
Though I do n't know what your opinion will be , " answered the princess joyfully .
" And are the hours the same ?
And the walks in the avenues ?
And the lathe ? " asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile which showed that , in spite of all his love and respect for his father , he was aware of his weaknesses .
When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the old prince to get up , T'ikhon came to call the young prince to his father .
The old man made a departure from his usual routine in honor of his son 's arrival : he gave orders to admit him to his apartments while he dressed for dinner .
" Ah ! here 's the warrior !
Wants to vanquish Buonaparte ? " said the old man , shaking his powdered head as much as the tail , which T'ikhon was holding fast to plait , would allow .
" You at least must tackle him properly , or else if he goes on like this he 'll soon have us , too , for his subjects !
How are you ? "
And he held out his cheek .
The old man was in a good temper after his nap before dinner .
( He used to say that a nap " after dinner was silver - before dinner , golden . " )
He cast happy , sidelong glances at his son from under his thick , bushy eyebrows .
Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father on the spot indicated to him .
He made no reply on his father 's favorite topic - making fun of the military men of the day , and more particularly of Bonaparte .
" Yes , Father , I have come to you and brought my wife who is pregnant , " said Prince Andrew , following every movement of his father 's face with an eager and respectful look .
" How is your health ? "
" Only fools and rakes fall ill , my boy .
You know me : I am busy from morning till night and abstemious , so of course I am well . "
" Thank God , " said his son smiling .
" God has nothing to do with it !
Well , go on
, " he continued , returning to his hobby ; " tell me how the Germans have taught you to fight Bonaparte by this new science you call ' strategy . ' "
Prince Andrew smiled .
" Give me time to collect my wits , Father , " said he , with a smile that showed that his father 's foibles did not prevent his son from loving and honoring him .
" Why , I have not yet had time to settle down ! "
" Nonsense , nonsense ! " cried the old man , shaking his pigtail to see whether it was firmly plaited , and grasping his by the hand . "
The house for your wife is ready .
Princess Mary will take her there and show her over , and they 'll talk nineteen to the dozen .
That 's their woman 's way !
I am glad to have her .
Sit down and talk .
About Mikhelson 's army
I understand - Tolst'oy 's too ...
a simultaneous expedition ....
But what 's the southern army to do ?
Prussia is neutral ...
I know that .
What about Austria ?
" said he , rising from his chair and pacing up and down the room followed by T'ikhon , who ran after him , handing him different articles of clothing . "
What of Sweden ?
How will they cross Pomerania ? "
The old prince did not evince the least interest during this explanation , but as if he were not listening to it continued to dress while walking about , and three times unexpectedly interrupted .
Once he stopped it by shouting : " The white one , the white one ! "
This meant that T'ikhon was not handing him the waistcoat he wanted .
Another time he interrupted , saying :
" And will she soon be confined ? " and shaking his head reproachfully said : " That 's bad !
Go on , go on . "
The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing his description .
The old man began to sing , in the cracked voice of old age : " Malbrook s'en va - t - en guerre .
Dieu sait quand reviendra . "
*
* " Marlborough is going to the wars ; God knows when he 'll return . "
His son only smiled .
" I do n't say it 's a plan I approve of , " said the son ; " I am only telling you what it is .
Napoleon has also formed his plan by now , not worse than this one . "
" Well , you 've told me nothing new , " and the old man repeated , meditatively and rapidly :
" Dieu sait quand reviendra .
Go to the dining room . "
CHAPTER XXVII
At dinner the prince usually spoke to the taciturn Michael Iv'anovich more often than to anyone else .
In the dining room , which like all the rooms in the house was exceedingly lofty , the members of the household and the footmen - one behind each chair - stood waiting for the prince to enter .
The head butler , napkin on arm , was scanning the setting of the table , making signs to the footmen , and anxiously glancing from the clock to the door by which the prince was to enter .
Prince Andrew , looking again at that genealogical tree , shook his head , laughing as a man laughs who looks at a portrait so characteristic of the original as to be amusing .
" How thoroughly like him that is !
" he said to Princess Mary , who had come up to him .
Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise .
She did not understand what he was laughing at .
Everything her father did inspired her with reverence and was beyond question .
" Everyone has his Achilles ' heel , " continued Prince Andrew .
"
Fancy , with his powerful mind , indulging in such nonsense ! "
Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother 's criticism and was about to reply , when the expected footsteps were heard coming from the study .
The prince walked in quickly and jauntily as was his wo nt , as if intentionally contrasting the briskness of his manners with the strict formality of his house .
At that moment the great clock struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawing room .
The prince stood still ; his lively glittering eyes from under their thick , bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and rested on the little princess .
She felt , as courtiers do when the Tsar enters , the sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired in all around him .
He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back of her neck .
" I 'm glad , glad , to see you , " he said , looking attentively into her eyes , and then quickly went to his place and sat down . "
Sit down , sit down !
Sit down , Michael Iv'anovich ! "
He indicated a place beside him to his daughter - in - law .
A footman moved the chair for her .
" Ho , ho ! " said the old man , casting his eyes on her rounded figure .
" You 've been in a hurry .
That 's bad ! "
He laughed in his usual dry , cold , unpleasant way , with his lips only and not with his eyes .
" You must walk , walk as much as possible , as much as possible , " he said .
The little princess did not , or did not wish to , hear his words .
She was silent and seemed confused .
The prince asked her about her father , and she began to smile and talk .
He asked about mutual acquaintances , and she became still more animated and chattered away giving him greetings from various people and retelling the town gossip .
" Countess Apr'aksina , poor thing , has lost her husband and she has cried her eyes out , " she said , growing more and more lively .
" Well , Michael Iv'anovich , our Bonaparte will be having a bad time of it .
Prince Andrew "
( he always spoke thus of his son ) " has been telling me what forces are being collected against him !
While you and I never thought much of him . "
" He is a great tactician ! " said the prince to his son , pointing to the architect .
And the conversation again turned on the war , on Bonaparte , and the generals and statesmen of the day .
Prince Andrew gaily bore with his father 's ridicule of the new men , and drew him on and listened to him with evident pleasure .
" The past always seems good , " said he , " but did not Suv'orov himself fall into a trap Moreau set him , and from which he did not know how to escape ? "
" Who told you that ?
Who ? " cried the prince . "
Suv'orov ! "
And he jerked away his plate , which T'ikhon briskly caught . "
Suv'orov ! ...
Consider , Prince Andrew .
Two ...
Frederick and Suv'orov ; Moreau ! ...
Moreau would have been a prisoner if Suv'orov had had a free hand ; but he had the Hofs - kriegs - wurst - schnapps - Rath on his hands .
It would have puzzled the devil himself !
When you get there you 'll find out what those Hofs - kriegs - wurst - Raths are !
Suv'orov could n't manage them so what chance has Michael Kut'uzov ?
Wonderful ! ...
Were the Pot"emkins , Suv'orovs , and Orl'ovs Germans ?
No , lad , either you fellows have all lost your wits , or I have outlived mine .
May God help you , but we 'll see what will happen .
Buonaparte has become a great commander among them !
Hm ! ... "
" I do n't at all say that all the plans are good , " said Prince Andrew , " I am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte .
You may laugh as much as you like , but all the same Bonaparte is a great general ! "
" Michael Iv'anovich ! " cried the old prince to the architect who , busy with his roast meat , hoped he had been forgotten : "
Did n't I tell you Buonaparte was a great tactician ?
Here , he says the same thing . "
" To be sure , your excellency , " replied the architect .
The prince again laughed his frigid laugh .
" Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth .
He has got splendid soldiers .
Besides he began by attacking Germans .
And only idlers have failed to beat the Germans .
Since the world began everybody has beaten the Germans .
They beat no one - except one another .
He made his reputation fighting them . "
And the prince began explaining all the blunders which , according to him , Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in politics .
His son made no rejoinder , but it was evident that whatever arguments were presented he was as little able as his father to change his opinion .
" You think I 'm an old man and do n't understand the present state of affairs ? " concluded his father . "
But it troubles me .
I do n't sleep at night .
Come now , where has this great commander of yours shown his skill ?
" he concluded .
" That would take too long to tell , " answered the son .
" Well , then go off to your Buonaparte !
Mademoiselle Bourienne , here 's another admirer of that powder - monkey emperor of yours , " he exclaimed in excellent French .
" You know , Prince , I am not a Bonapartist ! "
" Dieu sait quand reviendra . " hummed the prince out of tune and , with a laugh still more so , he quitted the table .
The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of the dinner sat silent , glancing with a frightened look now at her father - in - law and now at Princess Mary .
When they left the table she took her sister - in - law 's arm and drew her into another room .
" What a clever man your father is , " said she ; " perhaps that is why I am afraid of him . "
" Oh , he is so kind ! " answered Princess Mary .
CHAPTER XXVIII
Prince Andrew was to leave next evening .
The old prince , not altering his routine , retired as usual after dinner .
The little princess was in her sister - in - law 's room .
Prince Andrew in a traveling coat without epaulettes had been packing with his valet in the rooms assigned to him .
After inspecting the carriage himself and seeing the trunks put in , he ordered the horses to be harnessed .
All these traveling effects of Prince Andrew 's were in very good order : new , clean , and in cloth covers carefully tied with tapes .
When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life , men capable of reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind .
At such moments one reviews the past and plans for the future .
Prince Andrew 's face looked very thoughtful and tender .
With his hands behind him he paced briskly from corner to corner of the room , looking straight before him and thoughtfully shaking his head .
It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he heard .
" I hear you have given orders to harness , " she cried , panting ( she had apparently been running ) , " and I did so wish to have another talk with you alone !
God knows how long we may again be parted .
You are not angry with me for coming ?
You have changed so
, Andr'usha , " she added , as if to explain such a question .
She smiled as she uttered his pet name , " Andr'usha . "
It was obviously strange to her to think that this stern handsome man should be Andr'usha - the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in childhood .
" And where is Lise ? "
he asked , answering her question only by a smile .
" She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room .
Oh , Andrew !
What a treasure of a wife you have , " said she , sitting down on the sofa , facing her brother .
" She is quite a child : such a dear , merry child .
I have grown so fond of her . "
Prince Andrew was silent , but the princess noticed the ironical and contemptuous look that showed itself on his face .
" One must be indulgent to little weaknesses ; who is free from them , Andrew ?
Do n't forget that she has grown up and been educated in society , and so her position now is not a rosy one .
We should enter into everyone 's situation .
Tout comprendre , c'est tout pardonner .
* Think what it must be for her , poor thing , after what she has been used to , to be parted from her husband and be left alone in the country , in her condition !
It 's very hard . "
* To understand all is to forgive all .
Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister , as we smile at those we think we thoroughly understand .
" You live in the country and do n't think the life terrible , " he replied .
" I ... that 's different .
Why speak of me ?
I do n't want any other life , and ca n't , for I know no other .
But think , Andrew : for a young society woman to be buried in the country during the best years of her life , all alone - for Papa is always busy , and I ...
well , you know what poor resources I have for entertaining a woman used to the best society .
There is only Mademoiselle Bourienne .... "
" I do n't like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all , " said Prince Andrew .
" No ?
She is very nice and kind and , above all , she 's much to be pitied .
She has no one , no one .
To tell the truth , I do n't need her , and she 's even in my way .
You know I always was a savage , and now am even more so .
I like being alone ....
Father likes her very much .
She and Michael Iv'anovich are the two people to whom he is always gentle and kind , because he has been a benefactor to them both .
As Sterne says : ' We do n't love people so much for the good they have done us , as for the good we have done them . '
Father took her when she was homeless after losing her own father .
She is very good - natured , and my father likes her way of reading .
She reads to him in the evenings and reads splendidly . "
" To be quite frank , Mary , I expect Father 's character sometimes makes things trying for you , does n't it ? "
Prince Andrew asked suddenly .
Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question .
" For me ?
For me ? ...
Trying for me ! ... " said she .
" He always was rather harsh ; and now I should think he 's getting very trying , " said Prince Andrew , apparently speaking lightly of their father in order to puzzle or test his sister .
How can one judge Father ?
But even if one might , what feeling except veneration could such a man as my father evoke ?
And I am so contented and happy with him .
I only wish you were all as happy as I am . "
Her brother shook his head incredulously .
" The only thing that is hard for me ...
I will tell you the truth , Andrew ... is Father 's way of treating religious subjects .
I do n't understand how a man of his immense intellect can fail to see what is as clear as day , and can go so far astray .
That is the only thing that makes me unhappy .
But even in this I can see lately a shade of improvement .
His satire has been less bitter of late , and there was a monk he received and had a long talk with . "
" Ah ! my dear , I am afraid you and your monk are wasting your powder , " said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly .
" Ah ! mon ami , I only pray , and hope that God will hear me .
Andrew ...
" she said timidly after a moment 's silence , " I have a great favor to ask of you . "
" What is it , dear ? "
" No - promise that you will not refuse !
It will give you no trouble and is nothing unworthy of you , but it will comfort me .
Promise , Andr'usha ! ...
She looked timidly at her brother .
" Even if it were a great deal of trouble ... " answered Prince Andrew , as if guessing what it was about .
" Think what you please !
I know you are just like Father .
Think as you please , but do this for my sake !
Please do !
Father 's father , our grandfather , wore it in all his wars . "
( She still did not take out what she was holding in her reticule . )
" So you promise ? "
" Of course .
What is it ? "
" Andrew , I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you will never take it off .
Do you promise ? "
" If it does not weigh a hundredweight and wo n't break my neck ... To please you ... " said Prince Andrew .
But immediately , noticing the pained expression his joke had brought to his sister 's face , he repented and added : " I am glad ; really , dear , I am very glad . "
She crossed herself , kissed the icon , and handed it to Andrew .
" Please , Andrew , for my sake ! ... "
Rays of gentle light shone from her large , timid eyes .
Those eyes lit up the whole of her thin , sickly face and made it beautiful .
Her brother would have taken the icon , but she stopped him .
Andrew understood , crossed himself and kissed the icon .
There was a look of tenderness , for he was touched , but also a gleam of irony on his face .
" Thank you , my dear . "
She kissed him on the forehead and sat down again on the sofa .
They were silent for a while .
" As I was saying to you , Andrew , be kind and generous as you always used to be .
Do n't judge Lise harshly , " she began .
" She is so sweet , so good - natured , and her position now is a very hard one . "
" I do not think I have complained of my wife to you , M'asha , or blamed her .
Why do you say all this to me ? "
Red patches appeared on Princess Mary 's face and she was silent as if she felt guilty .
" I have said nothing to you , but you have already been talked to .
And I am sorry for that , " he went on .
The patches grew deeper on her forehead , neck , and cheeks .
She tried to say something but could not .
After crying she had fallen asleep .
Prince Andrew felt sorry for his sister .
" Know this , M'asha :
But if you want to know the truth ... if you want to know whether I am happy ?
No !
Is she happy ?
No !
But why this is so I do n't know ... "
As he said this he rose , went to his sister , and , stooping , kissed her forehead .
His fine eyes lit up with a thoughtful , kindly , and unaccustomed brightness , but he was looking not at his sister but over her head toward the darkness of the open doorway .
" Let us go to her , I must say good - by .
Or - go and wake
and I 'll come in a moment .
Petr'ushka !
" he called to his valet : " Come here , take these away .
Put this on the seat and this to the right . "
" Well , maybe ! " said Prince Andrew .
" Go , M'asha ; I 'll come immediately . "
On the way to his sister 's room , in the passage which connected one wing with the other , Prince Andrew met Mademoiselle Bourienne smiling sweetly .
It was the third time that day that , with an ecstatic and artless smile , she had met him in secluded passages .
" Oh ! I thought you were in your room , " she said , for some reason blushing and dropping her eyes .
Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and an expression of anger suddenly came over his face .
He said nothing to her but looked at her forehead and hair , without looking at her eyes , with such contempt that the Frenchwoman blushed and went away without a word .
When he reached his sister 's room his wife was already awake and her merry voice , hurrying one word after another , came through the open door .
She was speaking as usual in French , and as if after long self - restraint she wished to make up for lost time .
" No , but imagine the old Countess Z'ubova , with false curls and her mouth full of false teeth , as if she were trying to cheat old age ....
Ha , ha , ha !
Mary ! "
This very sentence about Countess Z'ubova and this same laugh Prince Andrew had already heard from his wife in the presence of others some five times .
He entered the room softly .
The little princess , plump and rosy , was sitting in an easy chair with her work in her hands , talking incessantly , repeating Petersburg reminiscences and even phrases .
Prince Andrew came up , stroked her hair , and asked if she felt rested after their journey .
She answered him and continued her chatter .
The coach with six horses was waiting at the porch .
It was an autumn night , so dark that the coachman could not see the carriage pole .
Servants with lanterns were bustling about in the porch .
The immense house was brilliant with lights shining through its lofty windows .
The domestic serfs were crowding in the hall , waiting to bid good - by to the young prince .
The members of the household were all gathered in the reception hall : Michael Iv'anovich , Mademoiselle Bourienne , Princess Mary , and the little princess .
Prince Andrew had been called to his father 's study as the latter wished to say good - by to him alone .
All were waiting for them to come out .
When Prince Andrew entered the study the old man in his old - age spectacles and white dressing gown , in which he received no one but his son , sat at the table writing .
He glanced round .
" Going ? "
And he went on writing .
" I 've come to say good - by . "
" Kiss me here , " and he touched his cheek : " Thanks , thanks ! "
" What do you thank me for ? "
" For not dilly - dallying and not hanging to a woman 's apron strings .
The Service before everything .
Thanks , thanks ! "
And he went on writing , so that his quill spluttered and squeaked .
" If you have anything to say , say it .
These two things can be done together , " he added .
" About my wife ... I am ashamed as it is to leave her on your hands .... "
" Why talk nonsense ?
Say what you want . "
" When her confinement is due , send to Moscow for an accoucheur ....
Let him be here .... "
The old prince stopped writing and , as if not understanding , fixed his stern eyes on his son .
" I know that no one can help if nature does not do her work , " said Prince Andrew , evidently confused .
" I know that out of a million cases only one goes wrong , but it is her fancy and mine .
They have been telling her things .
She has had a dream and is frightened . "
" Hm ... Hm ... " muttered the old prince to himself , finishing what he was writing .
" I 'll do it . "
He signed with a flourish and suddenly turning to his son began to laugh .
" It 's a bad business , eh ? "
" What is bad , Father ? "
" The wife ! " said the old prince , briefly and significantly .
" I do n't understand ! " said Prince Andrew .
" No , it ca n't be helped , lad , " said the prince .
" They 're all like that ; one ca n't unmarry .
Do n't be afraid ; I wo n't tell anyone , but you know it yourself . "
He seized his son by the hand with small bony fingers , shook it , looked straight into his son 's face with keen eyes which seemed to see through him , and again laughed his frigid laugh .
The son sighed , thus admitting that his father had understood him .
The old man continued to fold and seal his letter , snatching up and throwing down the wax , the seal , and the paper , with his accustomed rapidity .
" What 's to be done ?
She 's pretty !
I will do everything .
Make your mind easy , " said he in abrupt sentences while sealing his letter .
Andrew did not speak ; he was both pleased and displeased that his father understood him .
The old man got up and gave the letter to his son .
" Listen ! " said he ; " do n't worry about your wife : what can be done shall be .
Now listen !
Give this letter to Michael Ilari'onovich .
* I have written that he should make use of you in proper places and not keep you long as an adjutant : a bad position !
Tell him I remember and like him .
Write and tell me how he receives you .
If he is all right - serve him .
Nicholas Bolk'onski 's son need not serve under anyone if he is in disfavor .
Now come here . "
* Kut'uzov .
He spoke so rapidly that he did not finish half his words , but his son was accustomed to understand him .
He led him to the desk , raised the lid , drew out a drawer , and took out an exercise book filled with his bold , tall , close handwriting .
" I shall probably die before you .
So remember , these are my memoirs ; hand them to the Emperor after my death .
Now here is a Lombard bond and a letter ; it is a premium for the man who writes a history of Suv'orov 's wars .
Send it to the Academy .
Here are some jottings for you to read when I am gone .
You will find them useful . "
Andrew did not tell his father that he would no doubt live a long time yet .
He felt that he must not say it .
" I will do it all , Father , " he said .
" Well , now , good - by ! "
He gave his son his hand to kiss , and embraced him . "
" You need not have said that to me , Father , " said the son with a smile .
The old man was silent .
" I also wanted to ask you , " continued Prince Andrew , " if I 'm killed and if I have a son , do not let him be taken away from you - as I said yesterday ...
let him grow up with you ....
Please . "
" Not let the wife have him ? " said the old man , and laughed .
They stood silent , facing one another .
The old man 's sharp eyes were fixed straight on his son 's .
Something twitched in the lower part of the old prince 's face .
" We 've said good - by .
Go !
" he suddenly shouted in a loud , angry voice , opening his door .
" What is it ?
What ? " asked both princesses when they saw for a moment at the door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a white dressing gown , spectacled and wigless , shouting in an angry voice .
Prince Andrew sighed and made no reply .
" Well ! " he said , turning to his wife .
And this " Well ! " sounded coldly ironic , as if he were saying : " Now go through your performance . "
" Andrew , already ! " said the little princess , turning pale and looking with dismay at her husband .
He embraced her .
She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder .
He cautiously released the shoulder she leaned on , looked into her face , and carefully placed her in an easy chair .
" Adieu , Mary , " said he gently to his sister , taking her by the hand and kissing her , and then he left the room with rapid steps .
The little princess lay in the armchair , Mademoiselle Bourienne chafing her temples .
Princess Mary , supporting her sister - in - law , still looked with her beautiful eyes full of tears at the door through which Prince Andrew had gone and made the sign of the cross in his direction .
From the study , like pistol shots , came the frequent sound of the old man angrily blowing his nose .
Hardly had Prince Andrew gone when the study door opened quickly and the stern figure of the old man in the white dressing gown looked out .
" Gone ?
That 's all right ! "
said he ; and looking angrily at the unconscious little princess , he shook his head reprovingly and slammed the door .
BOOK TWO : 1805
CHAPTER I
Braunau was the headquarters of the commander in chief , Kut'uzov .
On October 11 , 1805 , one of the infantry regiments that had just reached Braunau had halted half a mile from the town , waiting to be inspected by the commander in chief .
On the evening of the last day 's march an order had been received that the commander in chief would inspect the regiment on the march .
There was only one circumstance concerning which no one could be at ease .
It was the state of the soldiers ' boots .
More than half the men 's boots were in holes .
But this defect was not due to any fault of the regimental commander , for in spite of repeated demands boots had not been issued by the Austrian commissariat , and the regiment had marched some seven hundred miles .
The commander of the regiment was an elderly , choleric , stout , and thick - set general with grizzled eyebrows and whiskers , and wider from chest to back than across the shoulders .
He had on a brand - new uniform showing the creases where it had been folded and thick gold epaulettes which seemed to stand rather than lie down on his massive shoulders .
He had the air of a man happily performing one of the most solemn duties of his life .
He walked about in front of the line and at every step pulled himself up , slightly arching his back .
" Well , Michael M'itrich , sir ?
" he said , addressing one of the battalion commanders who smilingly pressed forward ( it was plain that they both felt happy ) .
" We had our hands full last night .
However , I think the regiment is not a bad one , eh ? "
The battalion commander perceived the jovial irony and laughed .
" It would not be turned off the field even on the Tsar'itsin Meadow . "
" What ? " asked the commander .
At that moment , on the road from the town on which signalers had been posted , two men appeared on horse back .
They were an aide - de - camp followed by a Cossack .
With this object he intended to meet the regiment ; so the worse the condition it was in , the better pleased the commander in chief would be .
On hearing this the regimental commander hung his head , silently shrugged his shoulders , and spread out his arms with a choleric gesture .
" A fine mess we 've made of it ! " he remarked .
" There now !
Did n't I tell you , Michael M'itrich , that if it was said ' on the march ' it meant in greatcoats ? "
said he reproachfully to the battalion commander .
" Oh , my God ! "
he added , stepping resolutely forward . "
Company commanders ! "
he shouted in a voice accustomed to command . "
Sergeants major ! ...
How soon will he be here ?
" he asked the aide - de - camp with a respectful politeness evidently relating to the personage he was referring to .
" In an hour 's time , I should say . "
" Shall we have time to change clothes ? "
" I do n't know , General .... "
The regimental commander , going up to the line himself , ordered the soldiers to change into their greatcoats .
On all sides soldiers were running to and fro , throwing up their knapsacks with a jerk of their shoulders and pulling the straps over their heads , unstrapping their overcoats and drawing the sleeves on with upraised arms .
In half an hour all was again in order , only the squares had become gray instead of black .
The regimental commander walked with his jerky steps to the front of the regiment and examined it from a distance .
" Whatever is this ?
This !
" he shouted and stood still . "
Commander of the third company ! "
" Commander of the third company wanted by the general ! ...
commander to the general ... third company to the commander .
" The words passed along the lines and an adjutant ran to look for the missing officer .
The captain 's face showed the uneasiness of a schoolboy who is told to repeat a lesson he has not learned .
Spots appeared on his nose , the redness of which was evidently due to intemperance , and his mouth twitched nervously .
The general looked the captain up and down as he came up panting , slackening his pace as he approached .
" You will soon be dressing your men in petticoats !
What is this ?
" shouted the regimental commander , thrusting forward his jaw and pointing at a soldier in the ranks of the third company in a greatcoat of bluish cloth , which contrasted with the others .
" What have you been after ?
The commander in chief is expected and you leave your place ?
Eh ?
I 'll teach you to dress the men in fancy coats for a parade ....
Eh ... ? "
The commander of the company , with his eyes fixed on his superior , pressed two fingers more and more rigidly to his cap , as if in this pressure lay his only hope of salvation .
" Well , why do n't you speak ?
Whom have you got there dressed up as a Hungarian ? " said the commander with an austere gibe .
" Your excellency ... "
" Well , your excellency , what ?
Your excellency !
But what about your excellency ? ...
nobody knows . "
" Your excellency , it 's the officer D'olokhov , who has been reduced to the ranks , " said the captain softly .
" Well ? Has he been degraded into a field marshal , or into a soldier ?
If a soldier , he should be dressed in regulation uniform like the others . "
" Your excellency , you gave him leave yourself , on the march . "
" Gave him leave ?
Leave ?
That 's just like you young men , " said the regimental commander cooling down a little . "
Leave indeed ....
One says a word to you and you ...
What ?
" he added with renewed irritation , " I beg you to dress your men decently . "
And the commander , turning to look at the adjutant , directed his jerky steps down the line .
He was evidently pleased at his own display of anger and walking up to the regiment wished to find a further excuse for wrath .
Having snapped at an officer for an unpolished badge , at another because his line was not straight , he reached the third company .
" H - o - o - w are you standing ?
Where 's your leg ?
Your leg ? " shouted the commander with a tone of suffering in his voice , while there were still five men between him and D'olokhov with his bluish - gray uniform .
D'olokhov slowly straightened his bent knee , looking straight with his clear , insolent eyes in the general 's face .
" Why a blue coat ?
Off with it ...
Sergeant major !
Change his coat ...
the ras ... " he did not finish .
" General , I must obey orders , but I am not bound to endure ... " D'olokhov hurriedly interrupted .
" No talking in the ranks ! ...
No talking , no talking ! "
" Not bound to endure insults , " D'olokhov concluded in loud , ringing tones .
The eyes of the general and the soldier met .
The general became silent , angrily pulling down his tight scarf .
" I request you to have the goodness to change your coat , " he said as he turned away .
CHAPTER II
" He 's coming ! " shouted the signaler at that moment .
The regiment fluttered like a bird preening its plumage and became motionless .
" Att - ention ! " shouted the regimental commander in a soul - shaking voice which expressed joy for himself , severity for the regiment , and welcome for the approaching chief .
Along the broad country road , edged on both sides by trees , came a high , light blue Viennese cal`eche , slightly creaking on its springs and drawn by six horses at a smart trot .
Behind the cal`eche galloped the suite and a convoy of Croats .
Beside Kut'uzov sat an Austrian general , in a white uniform that looked strange among the Russian black ones .
The cal`eche stopped in front of the regiment .
The word of command rang out , and again the regiment quivered , as with a jingling sound it presented arms .
Then amidst a dead silence the feeble voice of the commander in chief was heard .
The regiment roared , " Health to your ex ... len ... len ... lency ! "
and again all became silent .
At first Kut'uzov stood still while the regiment moved ; then he and the general in white , accompanied by the suite , walked between the ranks .
Thanks to the strictness and assiduity of its commander the regiment , in comparison with others that had reached Braunau at the same time , was in splendid condition .
There were only 217 sick and stragglers .
Everything was in good order except the boots .
Kut'uzov walked through the ranks , sometimes stopping to say a few friendly words to officers he had known in the Turkish war , sometimes also to the soldiers .
The regimental commander ran forward on each such occasion , fearing to miss a single word of the commander in chief 's regarding the regiment .
Behind Kut'uzov , at a distance that allowed every softly spoken word to be heard , followed some twenty men of his suite .
These gentlemen talked among themselves and sometimes laughed .
Nearest of all to the commander in chief walked a handsome adjutant .
This was Prince Bolk'onski .
Beside him was his comrade Nesv'itski , a tall staff officer , extremely stout , with a kindly , smiling , handsome face and moist eyes .
Nesv'itski could hardly keep from laughter provoked by a swarthy hussar officer who walked beside him .
This hussar , with a grave face and without a smile or a change in the expression of his fixed eyes , watched the regimental commander 's back and mimicked his every movement .
Each time the commander started and bent forward , the hussar started and bent forward in exactly the same manner .
Nesv'itski laughed and nudged the others to make them look at the wag .
Kut'uzov walked slowly and languidly past thousands of eyes which were starting from their sockets to watch their chief .
On reaching the third company he suddenly stopped .
His suite , not having expected this , involuntarily came closer to him .
" Ah , Tim'okhin ! " said he , recognizing the red - nosed captain who had been reprimanded on account of the blue greatcoat .
" Another Ismail comrade , " said he .
"
A brave officer !
Are you satisfied with him ? "
he asked the regimental commander .
And the latter - unconscious that he was being reflected in the hussar officer as in a looking glass - started , moved forward , and answered : " Highly satisfied , your excellency ! "
" We all have our weaknesses , " said Kut'uzov smiling and walking away from him . "
He used to have a predilection for Bacchus . "
The regimental commander was afraid he might be blamed for this and did not answer .
The hussar at that moment noticed the face of the red - nosed captain and his drawn - in stomach , and mimicked his expression and pose with such exactitude that Nesv'itski could not help laughing .
Kut'uzov turned round .
The officer evidently had complete control of his face , and while Kut'uzov was turning managed to make a grimace and then assume a most serious , deferential , and innocent expression .
The third company was the last , and Kut'uzov pondered , apparently trying to recollect something .
Prince Andrew stepped forward from among the suite and said in French :
" You told me to remind you of the officer D'olokhov , reduced to the ranks in this regiment . "
" Where is D'olokhov ? " asked Kut'uzov .
D'olokhov , who had already changed into a soldier 's gray greatcoat , did not wait to be called .
The shapely figure of the fair - haired soldier , with his clear blue eyes , stepped forward from the ranks , went up to the commander in chief , and presented arms .
" Have you a complaint to make ? "
Kut'uzov asked with a slight frown .
" This is D'olokhov , " said Prince Andrew .
" Ah ! " said Kut'uzov .
" I hope this will be a lesson to you .
Do your duty .
The Emperor is gracious , and I sha n't forget you if you deserve well . "
" One thing I ask of your excellency , " D'olokhov said in his firm , ringing , deliberate voice . "
I ask an opportunity to atone for my fault and prove my devotion to His Majesty the Emperor and to Russia ! "
Kut'uzov turned away .
The same smile of the eyes with which he had turned from Captain Tim'okhin again flitted over his face .
He turned away with a grimace as if to say that everything D'olokhov had said to him and everything he could say had long been known to him , that he was weary of it and
it was not at all what he wanted .
He turned away and went to the carriage .
The regiment broke up into companies , which went to their appointed quarters near Braunau , where they hoped to receive boots and clothes and to rest after their hard marches .
" You wo n't bear me a grudge , Prokh'or Ign'atych ? " said the regimental commander , overtaking the third company on its way to its quarters and riding up to Captain Tim'okhin who was walking in front .
( The regimental commander 's face now that the inspection was happily over beamed with irrepressible delight . )
" It 's in the Emperor 's service ... it ca n't be helped ... one is sometimes a bit hasty on parade ...
I am the first to apologize , you know me ! ...
He was very pleased ! "
And he held out his hand to the captain .
" And tell Mr. D'olokhov that I wo n't forget him - he may be quite easy .
And tell me , please - I've been meaning to ask - how is he behaving himself , and in general ... "
" As far as the service goes he is quite punctilious , your excellency ; but his character ... " said Tim'okhin .
" And what about his character ? " asked the regimental commander .
" It 's different on different days , " answered the captain .
" One day he is sensible , well educated , and good - natured , and the next he 's a wild beast ....
In Poland , if you please , he nearly killed a Jew . "
" Oh , well , well ! " remarked the regimental commander . "
Still , one must have pity on a young man in misfortune .
You know he has important connections ...
Well , then , you just ... "
" I will , your excellency , " said Tim'okhin , showing by his smile that he understood his commander 's wish .
" Well , of course , of course ! "
The regimental commander sought out D'olokhov in the ranks and , reining in his horse , said to him :
" After the next affair ... epaulettes . "
D'olokhov looked round but did not say anything , nor did the mocking smile on his lips change .
" Well , that 's all right , " continued the regimental commander .
" A cup of vodka for the men from me , " he added so that the soldiers could hear .
" I thank you all !
God be praised ! " and he rode past that company and overtook the next one .
" Well , he 's really a good fellow , one can serve under him , " said Tim'okhin to the subaltern beside him .
" In a word , a hearty one ... " said the subaltern , laughing ( the regimental commander was nicknamed King of Hearts ) .
The cheerful mood of their officers after the inspection infected the soldiers .
The company marched on gaily .
The soldiers ' voices could be heard on every side .
" And they said Kut'uzov was blind of one eye ? "
" And so he is !
Quite blind ! "
" No , friend , he is sharper - eyed than you are .
Boots and leg bands ...
he noticed everything ... "
" When he looked at my feet , friend ... well , thinks I ... "
" And that other one with him , the Austrian , looked as if he were smeared with chalk - as white as flour !
I suppose they polish him up as they do the guns . "
" I say , F'edeshon ! ...
Did he say when the battles are to begin ?
You were near him .
Everybody said that Buonaparte himself was at Braunau . "
" Buonaparte himself ! ...
Just listen to the fool , what he does n't know !
The Prussians are up in arms now .
The Austrians , you see , are putting them down .
When they 've been put down , the war with Buonaparte will begin .
And he says Buonaparte is in Braunau !
Shows you 're a fool .
You 'd better listen more carefully ! "
" What devils these quartermasters are !
See , the fifth company is turning into the village already ...
they will have their buckwheat cooked before we reach our quarters . "
" Give me a biscuit , you devil ! "
" And did you give me tobacco yesterday ?
That 's just it , friend !
Ah , well , never mind , here you are . "
" They might call a halt here or we 'll have to do another four miles without eating . "
" Was n't it fine when those Germans gave us lifts !
You just sit still and are drawn along . "
" And here , friend , the people are quite beggarly .
There they all seemed to be Poles - all under the Russian crown - but here they 're all regular Germans . "
" Singers to the front " came the captain 's order .
And from the different ranks some twenty men ran to the front .
This song had been composed in the Turkish campaign and now being sung in Austria , the only change being that the words " Father K'amenski " were replaced by " Father Kut'uzov . "
" Oh , my bower , oh , my bower ... ! "
The soldiers , swinging their arms and keeping time spontaneously , marched with long steps .
Behind the company the sound of wheels , the creaking of springs , and the tramp of horses ' hoofs were heard .
Kut'uzov and his suite were returning to the town .
In the second file from the right flank , beside which the carriage passed the company , a blue - eyed soldier involuntarily attracted notice .
It was D'olokhov marching with particular grace and boldness in time to the song and looking at those driving past as if he pitied all who were not at that moment marching with the company .
The hussar cornet of Kut'uzov 's suite who had mimicked the regimental commander , fell back from the carriage and rode up to D'olokhov .
Hussar cornet Zherk'ov had at one time , in Petersburg , belonged to the wild set led by D'olokhov .
Zherk'ov had met D'olokhov abroad as a private and had not seen fit to recognize him .
But now that Kut'uzov had spoken to the gentleman ranker , he addressed him with the cordiality of an old friend .
" My dear fellow , how are you ? " said he through the singing , making his horse keep pace with the company .
" How am I ? "
D'olokhov answered coldly .
" I am as you see . "
The lively song gave a special flavor to the tone of free and easy gaiety with which Zherk'ov spoke , and to the intentional coldness of D'olokhov 's reply .
" And how do you get on with the officers ? " inquired Zherk'ov .
" All right .
They are good fellows .
And how have you wriggled onto the staff ? "
" I was attached ; I 'm on duty . "
Both were silent .
" She let the hawk fly upward from her wide right sleeve , " went the song , arousing an involuntary sensation of courage and cheerfulness .
Their conversation would probably have been different but for the effect of that song .
" Is it true that Austrians have been beaten ? " asked D'olokhov .
" The devil only knows !
They say so . "
" I 'm glad , " answered D'olokhov briefly and clearly , as the song demanded .
" I say , come round some evening and we 'll have a game of faro ! " said Zherk'ov .
" Why , have you too much money ? "
" Do come . "
" I ca n't .
I 've sworn not to .
I wo n't drink and wo n't play till I get reinstated . "
" Well , that 's only till the first engagement . "
" We shall see . "
They were again silent .
" Come if you need anything .
One can at least be of use on the staff ... "
D'olokhov smiled .
" Do n't trouble .
If I want anything , I wo n't beg - I'll take it ! "
" Well , never mind ; I only ... "
"
And I only ... "
" Good - by . "
" Good health ... "
" It 's a long , long way .
To my native land ... "
CHAPTER III
Prince Andrew Bolk'onski came into the room with the required papers .
Kut'uzov and the Austrian member of the Hofkriegsrath were sitting at the table on which a plan was spread out .
" Ah ! ... " said Kut'uzov glancing at Bolk'onski as if by this exclamation he was asking the adjutant to wait , and he went on with the conversation in French .
" All I can say , General , " said he with a pleasant elegance of expression and intonation that obliged one to listen to each deliberately spoken word .
It was evident that Kut'uzov himself listened with pleasure to his own voice . "
All I can say , General , is that if the matter depended on my personal wishes , the will of His Majesty the Emperor Francis would have been fulfilled long ago .
I should long ago have joined the archduke .
But circumstances are sometimes too strong for us , General . "
And that is the whole point . "
The Austrian general looked dissatisfied , but had no option but to reply in the same tone .
Kut'uzov bowed with the same smile .
The general frowned .
Though there was no definite news of an Austrian defeat , there were many circumstances confirming the unfavorable rumors that were afloat , and so Kut'uzov 's suggestion of an Austrian victory sounded much like irony .
But Kut'uzov went on blandly smiling with the same expression , which seemed to say that he had a right to suppose so .
And , in fact , the last letter he had received from Mack 's army informed him of a victory and stated strategically the position of the army was very favorable .
" Give me that letter , " said Kut'uzov turning to Prince Andrew . "
Please have a look at it "- and Kut'uzov with an ironical smile about the corners of his mouth read to the Austrian general the following passage , in German , from the Archduke Ferdinand 's letter :
We have fully concentrated forces of nearly seventy thousand men with which to attack and defeat the enemy should he cross the Lech .
We shall therefore confidently await the moment when the Imperial Russian army will be fully equipped , and shall then , in conjunction with it , easily find a way to prepare for the enemy the fate he deserves .
Kut'uzov sighed deeply on finishing this paragraph and looked at the member of the Hofkriegsrath mildly and attentively .
" But you know the wise maxim your excellency , advising one to expect the worst , " said the Austrian general , evidently wishing to have done with jests and to come to business .
He involuntarily looked round at the aide - de - camp .
" Excuse me , General , " interrupted Kut'uzov , also turning to Prince Andrew . "
Look here , my dear fellow , get from Kozl'ovski all the reports from our scouts .
Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of having understood from the first not only what had been said but also what Kut'uzov would have liked to tell him .
He gathered up the papers and with a bow to both , stepped softly over the carpet and went out into the waiting room .
Though not much time had passed since Prince Andrew had left Russia , he had changed greatly during that period .
In the expression of his face , in his movements , in his walk , scarcely a trace was left of his former affected languor and indolence .
He now looked like a man who has time to think of the impression he makes on others , but is occupied with agreeable and interesting work .
His face expressed more satisfaction with himself and those around him , his smile and glance were brighter and more attractive .
From Vienna Kut'uzov wrote to his old comrade , Prince Andrew 's father .
Your son bids fair to become an officer distinguished by his industry , firmness , and expedition .
I consider myself fortunate to have such a subordinate by me .
On Kut'uzov 's staff , among his fellow officers and in the army generally , Prince Andrew had , as he had had in Petersburg society , two quite opposite reputations .
Others , the majority , disliked him and considered him conceited , cold , and disagreeable .
But among these people Prince Andrew knew how to take his stand so that they respected and even feared him .
" Well , Prince ? " asked Kozl'ovski .
" I am ordered to write a memorandum explaining why we are not advancing . "
" And why is it ? "
Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders .
" Any news from Mack ? "
" No . "
" If it were true that he has been beaten , news would have come . "
" Probably , " said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door .
Prince Andrew stopped short .
" Commander in Chief Kut'uzov ? " said the newly arrived general speaking quickly with a harsh German accent , looking to both sides and advancing straight toward the inner door .
" The commander in chief is engaged , " said Kozl'ovski , going hurriedly up to the unknown general and blocking his way to the door .
" Whom shall I announce ? "
The unknown general looked disdainfully down at Kozl'ovski , who was rather short , as if surprised that anyone should not know him .
" The commander in chief is engaged , " repeated Kozl'ovski calmly .
The general 's face clouded , his lips quivered and trembled .
Then he lifted his head , stretched his neck as if he intended to say something , but immediately , with affected indifference , began to hum to himself , producing a queer sound which immediately broke off .
The door of the private room opened and Kut'uzov appeared in the doorway .
The general with the bandaged head bent forward as though running away from some danger , and , making long , quick strides with his thin legs , went up to Kut'uzov .
" Vous voyez le malheureux Mack , " he uttered in a broken voice .
Kut'uzov 's face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectly immobile for a few moments .
The report which had been circulated that the Austrians had been beaten and that the whole army had surrendered at Ulm proved to be correct .
Within half an hour adjutants had been sent in various directions with orders which showed that the Russian troops , who had hitherto been inactive , would also soon have to meet the enemy .
Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest lay in the general progress of the war .
He feared that Bonaparte 's genius might outweigh all the courage of the Russian troops , and at the same time could not admit the idea of his hero being disgraced .
Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew went toward his room to write to his father , to whom he wrote every day .
In the corridor he met Nesv'itski , with whom he shared a room , and the wag Zherk'ov ; they were as usual laughing .
" Why are you so glum ? " asked Nesv'itski noticing Prince Andrew 's pale face and glittering eyes .
" There 's nothing to be gay about , " answered Bolk'onski .
There was room enough in the wide corridor for the generals to pass the three officers quite easily , but Zherk'ov , pushing Nesv'itski aside with his arm , said in a breathless voice ,
" They 're coming ! ... they 're coming ! ...
Stand aside , make way , please make way ! "
The generals were passing by , looking as if they wished to avoid embarrassing attentions .
On the face of the wag Zherk'ov there suddenly appeared a stupid smile of glee which he seemed unable to suppress .
" Your excellency , " said he in German , stepping forward and addressing the Austrian general , " I have the honor to congratulate you . "
He bowed his head and scraped first with one foot and then with the other , awkwardly , like a child at a dancing lesson .
The member of the Hofkriegsrath looked at him severely but , seeing the seriousness of his stupid smile , could not but give him a moment 's attention .
He screwed up his eyes showing that he was listening .
" I have the honor to congratulate you .
General Mack has arrived , quite well , only a little bruised just here , " he added , pointing with a beaming smile to his head .
The general frowned , turned away , and went on .
" Gott , wie naiv ! "
* said he angrily , after he had gone a few steps .
* " Good God , what simplicity ! "
Nesv'itski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew , but Bolk'onski , turning still paler , pushed him away with an angry look and turned to Zherk'ov .
The nervous irritation aroused by the appearance of Mack , the news of his defeat , and the thought of what lay before the Russian army found vent in anger at Zherk'ov 's untimely jest .
Nesv'itski and Zherk'ov were so surprised by this outburst that they gazed at Bolk'onski silently with wide - open eyes .
" What 's the matter ?
I only congratulated them , " said Zherk'ov .
" I am not jesting with you ; please be silent ! "
cried Bolk'onski , and taking Nesv'itski 's arm
he left Zherk'ov , who did not know what to say .
" Come , what 's the matter , old fellow ? " said Nesv'itski trying to soothe him .
" What 's the matter ? " exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in his excitement . "
Quarante mille hommes massacr'es et l'arm'ee de nos alli'es d'etruite , et vous trouvez l`a le mot pour rire , " * he said , as if strengthening his views by this French sentence . "
C'est bien pour un garcon de rien comme cet individu do nt vous avez fait un ami , mais pas pour vous , pas pour vous .
* ( 2 ) Only a hobbledehoy could amuse himself in this way , " he added in Russian - but pronouncing the word with a French accent - having noticed that Zherk'ov could still hear him .
* " Forty thousand men massacred and the army of our allies destroyed , and you find that a cause for jesting ! "
* ( 2 ) "
It is all very well for that good - for - nothing fellow of whom you have made a friend , but not for you , not for you . "
He waited a moment to see whether the cornet would answer , but he turned and went out of the corridor .
CHAPTER IV
The P'avlograd Hussars were stationed two miles from Braunau .
The squadron in which Nicholas Rost'ov served as a cadet was quartered in the German village of Salzeneck .
The best quarters in the village were assigned to cavalry - captain Den'isov , the squadron commander , known throughout the whole cavalry division as V'aska
Den'isov .
Cadet Rost'ov , ever since he had overtaken the regiment in Poland , had lived with the squadron commander .
On October 11 , the day when all was astir at headquarters over the news of Mack 's defeat , the camp life of the officers of this squadron was proceeding as usual .
Den'isov , who had been losing at cards all night , had not yet come home when Rost'ov rode back early in the morning from a foraging expedition .
" Ah , Bondar'enko , dear friend ! " said he to the hussar who rushed up headlong to the horse . "
Walk him up and down , my dear fellow , " he continued , with that gay brotherly cordiality which goodhearted young people show to everyone when they are happy .
" Yes , your excellency , " answered the Ukrainian gaily , tossing his head .
" Mind , walk him up and down well ! "
Another hussar also rushed toward the horse , but Bondar'enko had already thrown the reins of the snaffle bridle over the horse 's head .
It was evident that the cadet was liberal with his tips and that it paid to serve him .
Rost'ov patted the horse 's neck and then his flank , and lingered for a moment .
" Splendid !
What a horse he will be ! "
he thought with a smile , and holding up his saber , his spurs jingling , he ran up the steps of the porch .
His landlord , who in a waistcoat and a pointed cap , pitchfork in hand , was clearing manure from the cowhouse , looked out , and his face immediately brightened on seeing Rost'ov . "
Sch"on gut Morgen !
Sch"on gut Morgen ! "
* he said winking with a merry smile , evidently pleased to greet the young man .
* " A very good morning !
A very good morning ! "
" Schon fleissig ? "
* said Rost'ov with the same gay brotherly smile which did not leave his eager face . "
Hoch Oestreicher !
Hoch Russen !
Kaiser Alexander hoch ! "
* ( 2 ) said he , quoting words often repeated by the German landlord .
* " Busy already ? "
* ( 2 ) " Hurrah for the Austrians !
Hurrah for the Russians !
Hurrah for Emperor Alexander ! "
The German laughed , came out of the cowshed , pulled off his cap , and waving it above his head cried :
" Und die ganze Welt hoch ! " *
* " And hurrah for the whole world ! "
Rost'ov waved his cap above his head like the German and cried laughing , " Und vivat die ganze Welt ! "
" What about your master ?
" he asked Lavr'ushka , Den'isov 's orderly , whom all the regiment knew for a rogue .
" Has n't been in since the evening .
Must have been losing , " answered Lavr'ushka .
" I know by now , if he wins he comes back early to brag about it , but if he stays out till morning it means he 's lost and will come back in a rage .
Will you have coffee ? "
" Yes , bring some . "
Ten minutes later Lavr'ushka brought the coffee . "
He 's coming ! " said he . "
Now for trouble ! "
Rost'ov looked out of the window and saw Den'isov coming home .
Den'isov was a small man with a red face , sparkling black eyes , and black tousled mustache and hair .
He wore an unfastened cloak , wide breeches hanging down in creases , and a crumpled shako on the back of his head .
He came up to the porch gloomily , hanging his head .
" Lavw'uska ! "
he shouted loudly and angrily , " take it off , blockhead ! "
" Well , I am taking it off , " replied Lavr'ushka 's voice .
" Ah , you 're up already , " said Den'isov , entering the room .
" Long ago , " answered Rost'ov , " I have already been for the hay , and have seen Fr"aulein Mathilde . "
" Weally !
And I 've been losing , bwother .
I lost yesterday like a damned fool ! "
cried Den'isov , not pronouncing his r 's . "
Such ill luck !
Such ill luck .
As soon as you left , it began and went on .
Hullo there !
Tea ! "
Puckering up his face though smiling , and showing his short strong teeth , he began with stubby fingers of both hands to ruffle up his thick tangled black hair .
" And what devil made me go to that wat ? " ( an officer nicknamed " the rat " ) he said , rubbing his forehead and whole face with both hands . "
Just fancy , he did n't let me win a single cahd , not one cahd . "
He took the lighted pipe that was offered to him , gripped it in his fist , and tapped it on the floor , making the sparks fly , while he continued to shout .
" He lets one win the singles and collahs it as soon as one doubles it ; gives the singles and snatches the doubles ! "
He scattered the burning tobacco , smashed the pipe , and threw it away .
Then he remained silent for a while , and all at once looked cheerfully with his glittering , black eyes at Rost'ov .
" If at least we had some women here ; but there 's nothing foh one to do but dwink .
If we could only get to fighting soon .
Hullo , who 's there ?
" he said , turning to the door as he heard a tread of heavy boots and the clinking of spurs that came to a stop , and a respectful cough .
" The squadron quartermaster ! " said Lavr'ushka .
Den'isov 's face puckered still more .
" Wetched ! " he muttered , throwing down a purse with some gold in it . "
Wost'ov , deah fellow , just see how much there is left and shove the purse undah the pillow , " he said , and went out to the quartermaster .
Rost'ov took the money and , mechanically arranging the old and new coins in separate piles , began counting them .
" Ah ! Tely'anin !
How d'ye do ?
They plucked me last night , " came Den'isov 's voice from the next room .
" Where ?
At Bykov 's , at the rat 's ... I knew it , " replied a piping voice , and Lieutenant Tely'anin , a small officer of the same squadron , entered the room .
Rost'ov thrust the purse under the pillow and shook the damp little hand which was offered him .
Tely'anin for some reason had been transferred from the Guards just before this campaign .
He behaved very well in the regiment but was not liked ; Rost'ov especially detested him and was unable to overcome or conceal his groundless antipathy to the man .
" Well , young cavalryman , how is my Rook behaving ? " he asked .
( Rook was a young horse Tely'anin had sold to Rost'ov . )
The lieutenant never looked the man he was speaking to straight in the face ; his eyes continually wandered from one object to another .
" I saw you riding this morning ... " he added .
" Oh , he 's all right , a good horse , " answered Rost'ov , though the horse for which he had paid seven hundred rubbles was not worth half that sum . "
He 's begun to go a little lame on the left foreleg , " he added .
" The hoof 's cracked !
That 's nothing .
I 'll teach you what to do and show you what kind of rivet to use . "
" Yes , please do , " said Rost'ov .
" I 'll show you , I 'll show you !
It 's not a secret .
And it 's a horse
you 'll thank me for . "
" Then I 'll have it brought round , " said Rost'ov wishing to avoid Tely'anin , and he went out to give the order .
In the passage Den'isov , with a pipe , was squatting on the threshold facing the quartermaster who was reporting to him .
On seeing Rost'ov , Den'isov screwed up his face and pointing over his shoulder with his thumb to the room where Tely'anin was sitting , he frowned and gave a shudder of disgust .
" Ugh ! I do n't like that fellow , " he said , regardless of the quartermaster 's presence .
Rost'ov shrugged his shoulders as much as to say : " Nor do I , but what 's one to do ? " and , having given his order , he returned to Tely'anin .
Tely'anin was sitting in the same indolent pose in which Rost'ov had left him , rubbing his small white hands .
" Well there certainly are disgusting people , " thought Rost'ov as he entered .
" Have you told them to bring the horse ? "
asked Tely'anin , getting up and looking carelessly about him .
" I have . "
" Let us go ourselves .
I only came round to ask Den'isov about yesterday 's order .
Have you got it , Den'isov ? "
" Not yet .
But where are you off to ? "
" I want to teach this young man how to shoe a horse , " said Tely'anin .
They went through the porch and into the stable .
The lieutenant explained how to rivet the hoof and went away to his own quarters .
When Rost'ov went back there was a bottle of vodka and a sausage on the table .
Den'isov was sitting there scratching with his pen on a sheet of paper .
He looked gloomily in Rost'ov 's face and said : " I am witing to her . "
He leaned his elbows on the table with his pen in his hand and , evidently glad of a chance to say quicker in words what he wanted to write , told Rost'ov the contents of his letter .
" You see , my fwiend , " he said , " we sleep when we do n't love .
We are childwen of the dust ... but one falls in love and one is a God , one is pua ' as on the fihst day of cweation ...
Who 's that now ?
Send him to the devil , I 'm busy ! "
he shouted to Lavr'ushka , who went up to him not in the least abashed .
" Who should it be ?
You yourself told him to come .
It 's the quartermaster for the money . "
Den'isov frowned and was about to shout some reply but stopped .
" Wetched business , " he muttered to himself . "
How much is left in the puhse ?
" he asked , turning to Rost'ov .
" Seven new and three old imperials . "
" Oh , it 's wetched !
Well , what are you standing there for , you
sca'cwow ?
Call the quahtehmasteh , " he shouted to Lavr'ushka .
" Please , Den'isov , let me lend you some : I have some , you know , " said Rost'ov , blushing .
" Do n't like bowwowing from my own fellows , I do n't , " growled Den'isov .
" But if you wo n't accept money from me like a comrade , you will offend me .
Really I have some , " Rost'ov repeated .
" No , I tell you . "
And Den'isov went to the bed to get the purse from under the pillow .
" Where have you put it , Wost'ov ? "
" Under the lower pillow . "
" It 's not there . "
Den'isov threw both pillows on the floor .
The purse was not there .
" That 's a miwacle . "
" Wait , have n't you dropped it ? " said Rost'ov , picking up the pillows one at a time and shaking them .
He pulled off the quilt and shook it .
The purse was not there .
" Dear me , can I have forgotten ?
No , I remember thinking that you kept it under your head like a treasure , " said Rost'ov .
" I put it just here .
Where is it ? "
he asked , turning to Lavr'ushka .
" I have n't been in the room .
It must be where you put it . "
" But it is n't ? ... "
" You 're always like that ; you thwow a thing down anywhere and forget it .
Feel in your pockets . "
" No , if I had n't thought of it being a treasure , " said Rost'ov , " but I remember putting it there . "
Lavr'ushka turned all the bedding over , looked under the bed and under the table , searched everywhere , and stood still in the middle of the room .
Den'isov silently watched Lavr'ushka 's movements , and when the latter threw up his arms in surprise saying it was nowhere to be found Den'isov glanced at Rost'ov .
" Wost'ov , you 've not been playing schoolboy twicks ... "
Rost'ov felt Den'isov 's gaze fixed on him , raised his eyes , and instantly dropped them again .
All the blood which had seemed congested somewhere below his throat rushed to his face and eyes .
He could not draw breath .
" And there has n't been anyone in the room except the lieutenant and yourselves .
It must be here somewhere , " said Lavr'ushka .
" Now then , you devil 's puppet , look alive and hunt for it ! " shouted Den'isov , suddenly , turning purple and rushing at the man with a threatening gesture .
" If the purse is n't found I 'll flog you , I 'll flog you all . "
Rost'ov , his eyes avoiding Den'isov , began buttoning his coat , buckled on his saber , and put on his cap .
" I must have that purse , I tell you , " shouted Den'isov , shaking his orderly by the shoulders and knocking him against the wall .
" Den'isov , let him alone , I know who has taken it , " said Rost'ov , going toward the door without raising his eyes .
Den'isov paused , thought a moment , and , evidently understanding what Rost'ov hinted at , seized his arm .
" Nonsense ! "
he cried , and the veins on his forehead and neck stood out like cords .
" You are mad , I tell you .
I wo n't allow it .
The purse is here !
I 'll flay this scoundwel alive , and it will be found . "
" I know who has taken it , " repeated Rost'ov in an unsteady voice , and went to the door .
" And I tell you , do n't you dahe to do it ! "
shouted Den'isov , rushing at the cadet to restrain him .
But Rost'ov pulled away his arm and , with as much anger as though Den'isov were his worst enemy , firmly fixed his eyes directly on his face .
" Do you understand what you 're saying ? " he said in a trembling voice .
" There was no one else in the room except myself .
So that if it is not so , then ... "
He could not finish , and ran out of the room .
" Ah , may the devil take you and evewybody , " were the last words Rost'ov heard .
Rost'ov went to Tely'anin 's quarters .
" The master is not in , he 's gone to headquarters , " said Tely'anin 's orderly .
" Has something happened ? "
he added , surprised at the cadet 's troubled face .
" No , nothing . "
" You 've only just missed him , " said the orderly .
The headquarters were situated two miles away from Salzeneck , and Rost'ov , without returning home , took a horse and rode there .
There was an inn in the village which the officers frequented .
Rost'ov rode up to it and saw Tely'anin 's horse at the porch .
In the second room of the inn the lieutenant was sitting over a dish of sausages and a bottle of wine .
" Ah , you 've come here too , young man ! " he said , smiling and raising his eyebrows .
" Yes , " said Rost'ov as if it cost him a great deal to utter the word ; and he sat down at the nearest table .
Both were silent .
There were two Germans and a Russian officer in the room .
No one spoke and the only sounds heard were the clatter of knives and the munching of the lieutenant .
" Please be quick , " he said .
The coin was a new one .
Rost'ov rose and went up to Tely'anin .
" Allow me to look at your purse , " he said in a low , almost inaudible , voice .
With shifting eyes but eyebrows still raised , Tely'anin handed him the purse .
" Yes , it 's a nice purse .
Yes , yes , " he said , growing suddenly pale , and added , " Look at it , young man . "
Rost'ov took the purse in his hand , examined it and the money in it , and looked at Tely'anin .
The lieutenant was looking about in his usual way and suddenly seemed to grow very merry .
" If we get to Vienna
I 'll get rid of it there
but in these wretched little towns there 's nowhere to spend it , " said he . "
Well , let me have it , young man , I 'm going . "
Rost'ov did not speak .
" And you ?
Are you going to have lunch too ?
They feed you quite decently here , " continued Tely'anin . "
Now then , let me have it . "
He stretched out his hand to take hold of the purse .
Rost'ov let go of it .
" Well , young man ?
" he said with a sigh , and from under his lifted brows he glanced into Rost'ov 's eyes .
Some flash as of an electric spark shot from Tely'anin 's eyes to Rost'ov 's and back , and back again and again in an instant .
" Come here , " said Rost'ov , catching hold of Tely'anin 's arm and almost dragging him to the window .
" That money is Den'isov 's ; you took it ...
" he whispered just above Tely'anin 's ear .
" What ?
What ?
How dare you ?
What ? " said Tely'anin .
But these words came like a piteous , despairing cry and an entreaty for pardon .
As soon as Rost'ov heard them , an enormous load of doubt fell from him .
He was glad , and at the same instant began to pity the miserable man who stood before him , but the task he had begun had to be completed .
" Heaven only knows what the people here may imagine , " muttered Tely'anin , taking up his cap and moving toward a small empty room . " We must have an explanation ... "
" I know it and shall prove it , " said Rost'ov .
" I ... "
Every muscle of Tely'anin 's pale , terrified face began to quiver , his eyes still shifted from side to side but with a downward look not rising to Rost'ov 's face , and his sobs were audible .
" Count ! ...
Do n't ruin a young fellow ... here is this wretched money , take it ...
" He threw it on the table .
" I have an old father and mother ! ... "
Rost'ov took the money , avoiding Tely'anin 's eyes , and went out of the room without a word .
But at the door he stopped and then retraced his steps .
"
O God , " he said with tears in his eyes , " how could you do it ? "
" Count ... " said Tely'anin drawing nearer to him .
" Do n't touch me , " said Rost'ov , drawing back .
" If you need it , take the money , " and he threw the purse to him and ran out of the inn .
CHAPTER V
That same evening there was an animated discussion among the squadron 's officers in Den'isov 's quarters .
" And I tell you , Rost'ov , that you must apologize to the colonel ! "
said a tall , grizzly - haired staff captain , with enormous mustaches and many wrinkles on his large features , to Rost'ov who was crimson with excitement .
The staff captain , K'irsten , had twice been reduced to the ranks for affairs of honor and had twice regained his commission .
" I will allow no one to call me a liar ! " cried Rost'ov . "
He told me I lied , and I told him he lied .
And there it rests .
" You just wait a moment , my dear fellow , and listen , " interrupted the staff captain in his deep bass , calmly stroking his long mustache . "
You tell the colonel in the presence of other officers that an officer has stolen ... "
" I 'm not to blame that the conversation began in the presence of other officers .
Perhaps I ought not to have spoken before them , but I am not a diplomatist .
That 's why I joined the hussars , thinking that here one would not need finesse ; and he tells me that I am lying - so let him give me satisfaction ... "
" That 's all right .
No one thinks you a coward , but that 's not the point .
Ask Den'isov whether it is not out of the question for a cadet to demand satisfaction of his regimental commander ? "
Den'isov sat gloomily biting his mustache and listening to the conversation , evidently with no wish to take part in it .
He answered the staff captain 's question by a disapproving shake of his head .
" You speak to the colonel about this nasty business before other officers , " continued the staff captain , " and Bogd'anich " ( the colonel was called Bogd'anich ) " shuts you up . "
" He did not shut me up , he said I was telling an untruth . "
" Well , have it so , and you talked a lot of nonsense to him and must apologize . "
" Not on any account ! " exclaimed Rost'ov .
" I did not expect this of you , " said the staff captain seriously and severely .
" You do n't wish to apologize , but , man , it 's not only to him but to the whole regiment - all of us - you're to blame all round .
The case is this : you ought to have thought the matter over and taken advice ; but no , you go and blurt it all straight out before the officers .
Now what was the colonel to do ?
Have the officer tried and disgrace the whole regiment ?
Disgrace the whole regiment because of one scoundrel ?
Is that how you look at it ?
We do n't see it like that .
And Bogd'anich was a brick : he told you you were saying what was not true .
It 's not pleasant , but what 's to be done , my dear fellow ?
You landed yourself in it .
And now , when one wants to smooth the thing over , some conceit prevents your apologizing , and you wish to make the whole affair public .
You are offended at being put on duty a bit , but why not apologize to an old and honorable officer ?
Whatever Bogd'anich may be , anyway he is an honorable and brave old colonel !
You 're quick at taking offense , but you do n't mind disgracing the whole regiment ! "
The staff captain 's voice began to tremble .
" You have been in the regiment next to no time , my lad , you 're here today
and tomorrow you 'll be appointed adjutant somewhere and can snap your fingers when it is said ' There are thieves among the P'avlograd officers ! '
But it 's not all the same to us !
Am I not right , Den'isov ?
It 's not the same ! "
Den'isov remained silent and did not move , but occasionally looked with his glittering black eyes at Rost'ov .
Oh , we do prize it , old fellow !
And all this is not right , it 's not right !
You may take offense or not
but I always stick to mother truth .
It 's not right ! "
And the staff captain rose and turned away from Rost'ov .
" That 's twue , devil take it ! "
shouted Den'isov , jumping up . "
Now then , Wost'ov , now then ! "
Rost'ov , growing red and pale alternately , looked first at one officer and then at the other .
" No , gentlemen , no ... you must n't think ... I quite understand .
You 're wrong to think that of me ...
I ... for me ... for the honor of the regiment I 'd ...
Ah well , I 'll show that in action , and for me the honor of the flag ...
Well , never mind
, it 's true
I 'm to blame , to blame all round .
Well , what else do you want ? ... "
" Come , that 's right , Count ! " cried the staff captain , turning round and clapping Rost'ov on the shoulder with his big hand .
" I tell you , " shouted Den'isov , " he 's a fine fellow . "
" That 's better , Count , " said the staff captain , beginning to address Rost'ov by his title , as if in recognition of his confession .
" Go and apologize , your excellency .
Yes , go ! "
" Gentlemen , I 'll do anything .
No one shall hear a word from me , " said Rost'ov in an imploring voice , " but I ca n't apologize , by God
I ca n't , do what you will !
How can I go and apologize like a little boy asking forgiveness ? "
Den'isov began to laugh .
" It 'll be worse for you .
Bogd'anich is vindictive and you 'll pay for your obstinacy , " said K'irsten .
" No , on my word it 's not obstinacy !
I ca n't describe the feeling .
I ca n't ... "
" Well , it 's as you like , " said the staff captain .
" And what has become of that scoundrel ? "
he asked Den'isov .
" He has weported himself sick , he 's to be stwuck off the list tomowwow , " muttered Den'isov .
" It is an illness , there 's no other way of explaining it , " said the staff captain .
" Illness or not , he 'd better not cwoss my path .
I 'd kill him ! "
shouted Den'isov in a bloodthirsty tone .
Just then Zherk'ov entered the room .
" What brings you here ? " cried the officers turning to the newcomer .
" We 're to go into action , gentlemen !
Mack has surrendered with his whole army . "
" It 's not true ! "
" I 've seen him myself ! "
" What ?
Saw the real Mack ?
With hands and feet ? "
" Into action !
Into action !
Bring him a bottle for such news !
But how did you come here ? "
" I 've been sent back to the regiment all on account of that devil , Mack .
An Austrian general complained of me .
I congratulated him on Mack 's arrival ...
What 's the matter , Rost'ov ?
You look as if you 'd just come out of a hot bath . "
" Oh , my dear fellow , we 're in such a stew here these last two days . "
The regimental adjutant came in and confirmed the news brought by Zherk'ov .
They were under orders to advance next day .
" We 're going into action , gentlemen ! "
" Well , thank God !
We 've been sitting here too long ! "
CHAPTER VI
Kut'uzov fell back toward Vienna , destroying behind him the bridges over the rivers Inn ( at Braunau ) and Traun ( near Linz ) .
On October 23 the Russian troops were crossing the river Enns .
At midday the Russian baggage train , the artillery , and columns of troops were defiling through the town of Enns on both sides of the bridge .
It was a warm , rainy , autumnal day .
Down below , the little town could be seen with its white , red - roofed houses , its cathedral , and its bridge , on both sides of which streamed jostling masses of Russian troops .
The turrets of a convent stood out beyond a wild virgin pine forest , and far away on the other side of the Enns the enemy 's horse patrols could be discerned .
Among the field guns on the brow of the hill the general in command of the rearguard stood with a staff officer , scanning the country through his fieldglass .
A little behind them Nesv'itski , who had been sent to the rearguard by the commander in chief , was sitting on the trail of a gun carriage .
A Cossack who accompanied him had handed him a knapsack and a flask , and Nesv'itski was treating some officers to pies and real doppelk"ummel .
The officers gladly gathered round him , some on their knees , some squatting Turkish fashion on the wet grass .
" Yes , the Austrian prince who built that castle was no fool .
It 's a fine place !
Why are you not eating anything , gentlemen ? "
Nesv'itski was saying .
" Thank you very much , Prince , " answered one of the officers , pleased to be talking to a staff officer of such importance . "
It 's a lovely place !
We passed close to the park and saw two deer ... and what a splendid house ! "
" Look , Prince , " said another , who would have dearly liked to take another pie but felt shy , and therefore pretended to be examining the countryside-"See , our infantrymen have already got there .
Look there in the meadow behind the village , three of them are dragging something .
They 'll ransack that castle , " he remarked with evident approval .
" So they will , " said Nesv'itski . "
No , but what I should like , " added he , munching a pie in his moist - lipped handsome mouth , " would be to slip in over there . "
He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery , and his eyes narrowed and gleamed .
" That would be fine , gentlemen ! "
The officers laughed .
" Just to flutter the nuns a bit .
They say there are Italian girls among them .
On my word I 'd give five years of my life for it ! "
" They must be feeling dull , too , " said one of the bolder officers , laughing .
Meanwhile the staff officer standing in front pointed out something to the general , who looked through his field glass .
" Yes , so it is , so it is , " said the general angrily , lowering the field glass and shrugging his shoulders , " so it is !
They 'll be fired on at the crossing .
And why are they dawdling there ? "
On the opposite side the enemy could be seen by the naked eye , and from their battery a milk - white cloud arose .
Then came the distant report of a shot , and our troops could be seen hurrying to the crossing .
Nesv'itski rose , puffing , and went up to the general , smiling .
" Would not your excellency like a little refreshment ? " he said .
" It 's a bad business , " said the general without answering him , " our men have been wasting time . "
" Had n't I better ride over , your excellency ? " asked Nesv'itski .
" Very good , " answered Nesv'itski .
He called the Cossack with his horse , told him to put away the knapsack and flask , and swung his heavy person easily into the saddle .
" I 'll really call in on the nuns , " he said to the officers who watched him smilingly , and he rode off by the winding path down the hill .
" Now then , let 's see how far it will carry , Captain .
Just try ! " said the general , turning to an artillery officer . "
Have a little fun to pass the time . "
" Crew , to your guns ! " commanded the officer .
In a moment the men came running gaily from their campfires and began loading .
" One ! " came the command .
Number one jumped briskly aside .
The faces of officers and men brightened up at the sound .
Everyone got up and began watching the movements of our troops below , as plainly visible as if but a stone 's throw away , and the movements of the approaching enemy farther off .
At the same instant the sun came fully out from behind the clouds , and the clear sound of the solitary shot and the brilliance of the bright sunshine merged in a single joyous and spirited impression .
CHAPTER VII
Two of the enemy 's shots had already flown across the bridge , where there was a crush .
Halfway across stood Prince Nesv'itski , who had alighted from his horse and whose big body was jammed against the railings .
He looked back laughing to the Cossack who stood a few steps behind him holding two horses by their bridles .
Each time Prince Nesv'itski tried to move on , soldiers and carts pushed him back again and pressed him against the railings , and all he could do was to smile .
" What a fine fellow you are , friend ! " said the Cossack to a convoy soldier with a wagon , who was pressing onto the infantrymen who were crowded together close to his wheels and his horses .
" What a fellow !
You ca n't wait a moment !
Do n't you see the general wants to pass ? "
But the convoyman took no notice of the word " general " and shouted at the soldiers who were blocking his way . "
Hi there , boys !
Keep to the left !
Wait a bit . "
But the soldiers , crowded together shoulder to shoulder , their bayonets interlocking , moved over the bridge in a dense mass .
Looking down over the rails Prince Nesv'itski saw the rapid , noisy little waves of the Enns , which rippling and eddying round the piles of the bridge chased each other along .
" It 's as if a dam had burst , " said the Cossack hopelessly .
" Are there many more of you to come ? "
" A million all but one ! " replied a waggish soldier in a torn coat , with a wink , and passed on followed by another , an old man .
" If he " ( he meant the enemy ) " begins popping at the bridge now , " said the old soldier dismally to a comrade , " you 'll forget to scratch yourself . "
That soldier passed on , and after him came another sitting on a cart .
" Where the devil have the leg bands been shoved to ? " said an orderly , running behind the cart and fumbling in the back of it .
And he also passed on with the wagon .
Then came some merry soldiers who had evidently been drinking .
" Yes , the ham was just delicious ... " answered another with a loud laugh .
And they , too , passed on , so that Nesv'itski did not learn who had been struck on the teeth , or what the ham had to do with it .
" Bah !
How they scurry .
He just sends a ball and they think they 'll all be killed , " a sergeant was saying angrily and reproachfully .
" As it flies past me , Daddy , the ball I mean , " said a young soldier with an enormous mouth , hardly refraining from laughing , " I felt like dying of fright .
I did , ' pon my word , I got that frightened ! "
said he , as if bragging of having been frightened .
That one also passed .
Then followed a cart unlike any that had gone before .
It was a German cart with a pair of horses led by a German , and seemed loaded with a whole houseful of effects .
A fine brindled cow with a large udder was attached to the cart behind .
A woman with an unweaned baby , an old woman , and a healthy German girl with bright red cheeks were sitting on some feather beds .
Evidently these fugitives were allowed to pass by special permission .
The eyes of all the soldiers turned toward the women , and while the vehicle was passing at foot pace all the soldiers ' remarks related to the two young ones .
Every face bore almost the same smile , expressing unseemly thoughts about the women .
" Just see , the German sausage is making tracks , too ! "
" Sell me the missis , " said another soldier , addressing the German , who , angry and frightened , strode energetically along with downcast eyes .
" See how smart she 's made herself !
Oh , the devils ! "
" There , Fed'otov , you should be quartered on them ! "
" I have seen as much before now , mate ! "
" Where are you going ? " asked an infantry officer who was eating an apple , also half smiling as he looked at the handsome girl .
The German closed his eyes , signifying that he did not understand .
" Take it if you like , " said the officer , giving the girl an apple .
The girl smiled and took it .
Nesv'itski like the rest of the men on the bridge did not take his eyes off the women till they had passed .
When they had gone by , the same stream of soldiers followed , with the same kind of talk , and at last all stopped .
As often happens , the horses of a convoy wagon became restive at the end of the bridge , and the whole crowd had to wait .
" And why are they stopping ?
There 's no proper order ! " said the soldiers .
" Where are you shoving to ?
Devil take you !
Ca n't you wait ?
It 'll be worse if he fires the bridge .
See , here 's an officer jammed in too "-
different voices were saying in the crowd , as the men looked at one another , and all pressed toward the exit from the bridge .
Looking down at the waters of the Enns under the bridge , Nesv'itski suddenly heard a sound new to him , of something swiftly approaching ...
something big , that splashed into the water .
" Just see where it carries to ! " a soldier near by said sternly , looking round at the sound .
" Encouraging us to get along quicker , " said another uneasily .
The crowd moved on again .
Nesv'itski realized that it was a cannon ball .
" Hey , Cossack , my horse ! "
he said .
" Now , then , you there !
get out of the way !
Make way ! "
With great difficulty he managed to get to his horse , and shouting continually he moved on .
The soldiers squeezed themselves to make way for him , but again pressed on him so that they jammed his leg , and those nearest him were not to blame for they were themselves pressed still harder from behind .
" Nesv'itski , Nesv'itski !
you numskull ! "
came a hoarse voice from behind him .
" Ah , V'aska ! "
joyfully replied Nesv'itski .
" What 's up with you ? "
" What is this ?
They 're like sheep !
Just like sheep !
Out of the way ! ...
Let us pass ! ...
Stop there , you devil with the cart !
I 'll hack you with my saber ! "
he shouted , actually drawing his saber from its scabbard and flourishing it .
The soldiers crowded against one another with terrified faces , and Den'isov joined Nesv'itski .
" How 's it you 're not drunk today ? " said Nesv'itski when the other had ridden up to him .
" They do n't even give one time to dwink ! " answered V'aska Den'isov .
" They keep dwagging the wegiment to and fwo all day .
If they mean to fight , let 's fight .
But the devil knows what this is . "
" What a dandy you are today ! " said Nesv'itski , looking at Den'isov 's new cloak and saddlecloth .
Den'isov smiled , took out of his sabretache a handkerchief that diffused a smell of perfume , and put it to Nesv'itski 's nose .
" Of course .
I 'm going into action !
I 've shaved , bwushed my teeth , and scented myself . "
Beside the bridge Nesv'itski found the colonel to whom he had to deliver the order , and having done this he rode back .
Having cleared the way Den'isov stopped at the end of the bridge .
Carelessly holding in his stallion that was neighing and pawing the ground , eager to rejoin its fellows , he watched his squadron draw nearer .
" Smart lads !
Only fit for a fair ! " said one .
" What good are they ?
They 're led about just for show ! "
remarked another .
" Do n't kick up the dust , you infantry ! " jested an hussar whose prancing horse had splashed mud over some foot soldiers .
" I 'd like to put you on a two days ' march with a knapsack !
Your fine cords would soon get a bit rubbed , " said an infantryman , wiping the mud off his face with his sleeve .
" Perched up there , you 're more like a bird than a man . "
" There now , Z'ikin , they ought to put you on a horse .
You 'd look fine , " said a corporal , chaffing a thin little soldier who bent under the weight of his knapsack .
" Take a stick between your legs , that 'll suit you for a horse ! "
the hussar shouted back .
CHAPTER VIII
The last of the infantry hurriedly crossed the bridge , squeezing together as they approached it as if passing through a funnel .
At last the baggage wagons had all crossed , the crush was less , and the last battalion came onto the bridge .
At the foot of the hill lay wasteland over which a few groups of our Cossack scouts were moving .
Suddenly on the road at the top of the high ground , artillery and troops in blue uniform were seen .
These were the French .
A group of Cossack scouts retired down the hill at a trot .
The weather had cleared again since noon and the sun was descending brightly upon the Danube and the dark hills around it .
It was calm , and at intervals the bugle calls and the shouts of the enemy could be heard from the hill .
There was no one now between the squadron and the enemy except a few scattered skirmishers .
An empty space of some seven hundred yards was all that separated them .
The enemy ceased firing , and that stern , threatening , inaccessible , and intangible line which separates two hostile armies was all the more clearly felt .
" One step beyond that boundary line which resembles the line dividing the living from the dead lies uncertainty , suffering , and death .
And what is there ?
Who is there ?-
there beyond that field , that tree , that roof lit up by the sun ?
No one knows , but one wants to know .
But you are strong , healthy , cheerful , and excited , and are surrounded by other such excitedly animated and healthy men . "
So thinks , or at any rate feels , anyone who comes in sight of the enemy , and that feeling gives a particular glamour and glad keenness of impression to everything that takes place at such moments .
On the high ground where the enemy was , the smoke of a cannon rose , and a ball flew whistling over the heads of the hussar squadron .
The officers who had been standing together rode off to their places .
The hussars began carefully aligning their horses .
Silence fell on the whole squadron .
All were looking at the enemy in front and at the squadron commander , awaiting the word of command .
A second and a third cannon ball flew past .
Evidently they were firing at the hussars , but the balls with rapid rhythmic whistle flew over the heads of the horsemen and fell somewhere beyond them .
The soldiers without turning their heads glanced at one another , curious to see their comrades ' impression .
Every face , from Den'isov 's to that of the bugler , showed one common expression of conflict , irritation , and excitement , around chin and mouth .
The quartermaster frowned , looking at the soldiers as if threatening to punish them .
Cadet
Mir'onov ducked every time a ball flew past .
He was glancing at everyone with a clear , bright expression , as if asking them to notice how calmly he sat under fire .
But despite himself , on his face too that same indication of something new and stern showed round the mouth .
" Who 's that curtseying there ?
Cadet Miw'onov !
That 's not wight !
Look at me , " cried Den'isov who , unable to keep still on one spot , kept turning his horse in front of the squadron .
He rode up to K'irsten .
The staff captain on his broad - backed , steady mare came at a walk to meet him .
His face with its long mustache was serious as always , only his eyes were brighter than usual .
" Well , what about it ? " said he to Den'isov .
" It wo n't come to a fight .
You 'll see - we shall retire . "
" The devil only knows what they 're about ! " muttered Den'isov . "
Ah , Wost'ov , " he cried noticing the cadet 's bright face , " you 've got it at last . "
And he smiled approvingly , evidently pleased with the cadet .
Rost'ov felt perfectly happy .
Just then the commander appeared on the bridge .
Den'isov galloped up to him .
" Your excellency !
Let us attack them !
I 'll dwive them off . "
" Attack indeed ! " said the colonel in a bored voice , puckering up his face as if driving off a troublesome fly . "
And why are you stopping here ?
Do n't you see the skirmishers are retreating ?
Lead the squadron back . "
The squadron crossed the bridge and drew out of range of fire without having lost a single man .
The second squadron that had been in the front line followed them across and the last Cossacks quitted the farther side of the river .
The two P'avlograd squadrons , having crossed the bridge , retired up the hill one after the other .
Next he thought that his enemy would send the squadron on a desperate attack just to punish him - Rost'ov .
Then he imagined how , after the attack , Bogd'anich would come up to him as he lay wounded and would magnanimously extend the hand of reconciliation .
The high - shouldered figure of Zherk'ov , familiar to the P'avlograds as he had but recently left their regiment , rode up to the colonel .
He now came to his former chief with an order from the commander of the rear guard .
" Colonel , " he said , addressing Rost'ov 's enemy with an air of gloomy gravity and glancing round at his comrades , " there is an order to stop and fire the bridge . "
" An order to who ? " asked the colonel morosely .
Zherk'ov was followed by an officer of the suite who rode up to the colonel of hussars with the same order .
After him the stout Nesv'itski came galloping up on a Cossack horse that could scarcely carry his weight .
" How 's this , Colonel ? " he shouted as he approached . "
I told you to fire the bridge , and now someone has gone and blundered ; they are all beside themselves over there and one ca n't make anything out . "
The colonel deliberately stopped the regiment and turned to Nesv'itski .
" You spoke to me of inflammable material , " said he , " but you said nothing about firing it . "
" I am not your ' dear sir , ' Mr. Staff Officer , and you did not tell me to burn the bridge !
I know the service , and it is my habit orders strictly to obey .
You said the bridge would be burned , but who would it burn , I could not know by the holy spirit ! "
" Ah , that 's always the way ! " said Nesv'itski with a wave of the hand .
" How did you get here ? "
said he , turning to Zherk'ov .
" On the same business .
But you are damp !
Let me wring you out ! "
" You were saying , Mr. Staff Officer ... " continued the colonel in an offended tone .
" Colonel , " interrupted the officer of the suite , " You must be quick or the enemy will bring up his guns to use grapeshot . "
The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite , at the stout staff officer , and at Zherk'ov , and he frowned .
" I will the bridge fire , " he said in a solemn tone as if to announce that in spite of all the unpleasantness he had to endure he would still do the right thing .
" There , it 's just as I thought , " said Rost'ov to himself . "
He wishes to test me ! "
His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his face . "
Let him see whether I am a coward ! "
he thought .
Again on all the bright faces of the squadron the serious expression appeared that they had worn when under fire .
Then came the word of command .
" Look sharp !
Look sharp ! "
several voices repeated around him .
Their sabers catching in the bridles and their spurs jingling , the hussars hastily dismounted , not knowing what they were to do .
The men were crossing themselves .
Rost'ov no longer looked at the colonel , he had no time .
He was afraid of falling behind the hussars , so much afraid that his heart stood still .
His hand trembled as he gave his horse into an orderly 's charge , and he felt the blood rush to his heart with a thud .
Den'isov rode past him , leaning back and shouting something .
Rost'ov saw nothing but the hussars running all around him , their spurs catching and their sabers clattering .
" Stretchers ! " shouted someone behind him .
The others outstripped him .
" At boss zides , Captain , " he heard the voice of the colonel , who , having ridden ahead , had pulled up his horse near the bridge , with a triumphant , cheerful face .
Rost'ov wiping his muddy hands on his breeches looked at his enemy and was about to run on , thinking that the farther he went to the front the better .
But Bogd'anich , without looking at or recognizing Rost'ov , shouted to him :
" Who 's that running on the middle of the bridge ?
To the right !
Come back , Cadet ! "
he cried angrily ; and turning to Den'isov , who , showing off his courage , had ridden on to the planks of the bridge :
" Why run risks , Captain ?
You should dismount , " he said .
" Oh , every bullet has its billet , " answered V'aska Den'isov , turning in his saddle .
" Will they burn the bridge or not ?
Who 'll get there first ?
Will they get there and fire the bridge or will the French get within grapeshot range and wipe them out ? "
" Ugh .
The hussars will get it hot ! " said Nesv'itski ; " they are within grapeshot range now . "
" He should n't have taken so many men , " said the officer of the suite .
" True enough , " answered Nesv'itski ; " two smart fellows could have done the job just as well . "
Ah , your excellency !
How you look at things !
Send two men ?
And who then would give us the Vlad'imir medal and ribbon ?
But now , even if they do get peppered , the squadron may be recommended for honors and he may get a ribbon .
Our Bogd'anich knows how things are done . "
" There now ! " said the officer of the suite , " that 's grapeshot . "
He pointed to the French guns , the limbers of which were being detached and hurriedly removed .
Then two reports one after another , and a third .
" Oh ! Oh ! " groaned Nesv'itski as if in fierce pain , seizing the officer of the suite by the arm . "
Look !
A man has fallen !
Fallen , fallen ! "
" Two , I think . "
" If I were Tsar I would never go to war , " said Nesv'itski , turning away .
The French guns were hastily reloaded .
The infantry in their blue uniforms advanced toward the bridge at a run .
Smoke appeared again but at irregular intervals , and grapeshot cracked and rattled onto the bridge .
But this time Nesv'itski could not see what was happening there , as a dense cloud of smoke arose from it .
The hussars had succeeded in setting it on fire and the French batteries were now firing at them , no longer to hinder them but because the guns were trained and there was someone to fire at .
The French had time to fire three rounds of grapeshot before the hussars got back to their horses .
Two were misdirected and the shot went too high , but the last round fell in the midst of a group of hussars and knocked three of them over .
Rost'ov , absorbed by his relations with Bogd'anich , had paused on the bridge not knowing what to do .
He stood looking about him , when suddenly he heard a rattle on the bridge as if nuts were being spilt , and the hussar nearest to him fell against the rails with a groan .
Rost'ov ran up to him with the others .
Again someone shouted , " Stretchers ! "
Four men seized the hussar and began lifting him .
" Oooh !
For Christ 's sake let me alone ! " cried the wounded man , but still he was lifted and laid on the stretcher .
Nicholas Rost'ov turned away and , as if searching for something , gazed into the distance , at the waters of the Danube , at the sky , and at the sun .
How beautiful the sky looked ;
how blue , how calm , and how deep !
How bright and glorious was the setting sun !
With what soft glitter the waters of the distant Danube shone .
And fairer still were the faraway blue mountains beyond the river , the nunnery , the mysterious gorges , and the pine forests veiled in the mist of their summits ...
There was peace and happiness ...
" I should wish for nothing else , nothing , if only I were there , " thought Rost'ov .
" In myself alone and in that sunshine there is so much happiness ; but here ... groans , suffering , fear , and this uncertainty and hurry ...
There - they are shouting again , and again are all running back somewhere , and I shall run with them , and it , death , is here above me and around ...
Another instant
and I shall never again see the sun , this water , that gorge ! ... "
At that instant the sun began to hide behind the clouds , and other stretchers came into view before Rost'ov .
And the fear of death and of the stretchers , and love of the sun and of life , all merged into one feeling of sickening agitation .
" O Lord God !
Thou who art in that heaven , save , forgive , and protect me ! "
Rost'ov whispered .
The hussars ran back to the men who held their horses ; their voices sounded louder and calmer , the stretchers disappeared from sight .
" Well , fwiend ?
So you 've smelt powdah ! "
shouted V'aska
Den'isov just above his ear .
" It 's all over ; but I am a coward - yes , a coward ! "
thought Rost'ov , and sighing deeply he took Rook , his horse , which stood resting one foot , from the orderly and began to mount .
" Was that grapeshot ? " he asked Den'isov .
" Yes and no mistake !
" cried Den'isov .
" You worked like wegular bwicks and it 's nasty work !
An attack 's pleasant work !
Hacking away at the dogs !
But this sort of thing is the very devil , with them shooting at you like a target . "
And Den'isov rode up to a group that had stopped near Rost'ov , composed of the colonel , Nesv'itski , Zherk'ov , and the officer from the suite .
" Well , it seems that no one has noticed , " thought Rost'ov .
And this was true .
No one had taken any notice , for everyone knew the sensation which the cadet under fire for the first time had experienced .
" Here 's something for you to report , " said Zherk'ov .
" See if I do n't get promoted to a sublieutenancy . "
" Inform the prince that I the bridge fired ! " said the colonel triumphantly and gaily .
" And if he asks about the losses ? "
CHAPTER IX
Austrian troops that had escaped capture at Ulm and had joined Kut'uzov at Braunau now separated from the Russian army , and Kut'uzov was left with only his own weak and exhausted forces .
The defense of Vienna was no longer to be thought of .
On the thirtieth he attacked Mortier 's division , which was on the left bank , and broke it up .
In this action for the first time trophies were taken : banners , cannon , and two enemy generals .
For the first time , after a fortnight 's retreat , the Russian troops had halted and after a fight had not only held the field but had repulsed the French .
Throughout the whole army and at headquarters most joyful though erroneous rumors were rife of the imaginary approach of columns from Russia , of some victory gained by the Austrians , and of the retreat of the frightened Bonaparte .
Prince Andrew during the battle had been in attendance on the Austrian General Schmidt , who was killed in the action .
His horse had been wounded under him and his own arm slightly grazed by a bullet .
To be so sent meant not only a reward but an important step toward promotion .
The night was dark but starry , the road showed black in the snow that had fallen the previous day - the day of the battle .
As soon as he closed his eyes his ears seemed filled with the rattle of the wheels and the sensation of victory .
He again recalled all the details of the victory and his own calm courage during the battle , and feeling reassured he dozed off ....
The dark starry night was followed by a bright cheerful morning .
The snow was thawing in the sunshine , the horses galloped quickly , and on both sides of the road were forests of different kinds , fields , and villages .
At one of the post stations he overtook a convoy of Russian wounded .
The Russian officer in charge of the transport lolled back in the front cart , shouting and scolding a soldier with coarse abuse .
In each of the long German carts six or more pale , dirty , bandaged men were being jolted over the stony road .
Some of them were talking ( he heard Russian words ) , others were eating bread ; the more severely wounded looked silently , with the languid interest of sick children , at the envoy hurrying past them .
Prince Andrew told his driver to stop , and asked a soldier in what action they had been wounded . "
Day before yesterday , on the Danube , " answered the soldier .
Prince Andrew took out his purse and gave the soldier three gold pieces .
" That 's for them all , " he said to the officer who came up .
" Get well soon , lads ! "
he continued , turning to the soldiers .
" There 's plenty to do still . "
" What news , sir ? " asked the officer , evidently anxious to start a conversation .
" Good news ! ...
Go on !
" he shouted to the driver , and they galloped on .
Despite his rapid journey and sleepless night , Prince Andrew when he drove up to the palace felt even more vigorous and alert than he had done the day before .
Only his eyes gleamed feverishly and his thoughts followed one another with extraordinary clearness and rapidity .
He again vividly recalled the details of the battle , no longer dim , but definite and in the concise form in which he imagined himself stating them to the Emperor Francis .
He vividly imagined the casual questions that might be put to him and the answers he would give .
He expected to be at once presented to the Emperor .
At the chief entrance to the palace , however , an official came running out to meet him , and learning that he was a special messenger led him to another entrance .
" To the right from the corridor , Euer Hochgeboren !
There you will find the adjutant on duty , " said the official .
" He will conduct you to the Minister of War . "
The adjutant on duty , meeting Prince Andrew , asked him to wait , and went in to the Minister of War .
Five minutes later he returned and bowing with particular courtesy ushered Prince Andrew before him along a corridor to the cabinet where the Minister of War was at work .
The adjutant by his elaborate courtesy appeared to wish to ward off any attempt at familiarity on the part of the Russian messenger .
Prince Andrew 's joyous feeling was considerably weakened as he approached the door of the minister 's room .
He felt offended , and without his noticing it the feeling of offense immediately turned into one of disdain which was quite uncalled for .
His fertile mind instantly suggested to him a point of view which gave him a right to despise the adjutant and the minister . "
Away from the smell of powder , they probably think it easy to gain victories ! " he thought .
His eyes narrowed disdainfully , he entered the room of the Minister of War with peculiarly deliberate steps .
A wax candle stood at each side of the minister 's bent bald head with its gray temples .
He went on reading to the end , without raising his eyes at the opening of the door and the sound of footsteps .
" Take this and deliver it , " said he to his adjutant , handing him the papers and still taking no notice of the special messenger .
But that is a matter of perfect indifference to me , " he thought .
The minister drew the remaining papers together , arranged them evenly , and then raised his head .
He had an intellectual and distinctive head , but the instant he turned to Prince Andrew the firm , intelligent expression on his face changed in a way evidently deliberate and habitual to him .
His face took on the stupid artificial smile ( which does not even attempt to hide its artificiality ) of a man who is continually receiving many petitioners one after another .
" From General Field Marshal Kut'uzov ? " he asked .
" I hope it is good news ?
There has been an encounter with Mortier ?
A victory ?
It was high time ! "
He took the dispatch which was addressed to him and began to read it with a mournful expression .
" Oh , my God !
My God ! Schmidt ! "
he exclaimed in German . "
What a calamity !
What a calamity ! "
Having glanced through the dispatch he laid it on the table and looked at Prince Andrew , evidently considering something .
" Ah what a calamity !
You say the affair was decisive ?
But Mortier is not captured . "
Again he pondered .
" I am very glad you have brought good news , though Schmidt 's death is a heavy price to pay for the victory .
His Majesty will no doubt wish to see you , but not today .
I thank you !
You must have a rest .
Be at the levee tomorrow after the parade .
However , I will let you know . "
The stupid smile , which had left his face while he was speaking , reappeared .
" Au revoir !
Thank you very much .
His Majesty will probably desire to see you , " he added , bowing his head .
When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the interest and happiness the victory had afforded him had been now left in the indifferent hands of the Minister of War and the polite adjutant .
The whole tenor of his thoughts instantaneously changed ; the battle seemed the memory of a remote event long past .
CHAPTER X
Prince Andrew stayed at Br"unn with Bil'ibin , a Russian acquaintance of his in the diplomatic service .
" Ah , my dear prince !
I could not have a more welcome visitor , " said Bil'ibin as he came out to meet Prince Andrew . "
Franz , put the prince 's things in my bedroom , " said he to the servant who was ushering Bolk'onski in . "
So you 're a messenger of victory , eh ?
Splendid !
And I am sitting here ill , as you see . "
After washing and dressing , Prince Andrew came into the diplomat 's luxurious study and sat down to the dinner prepared for him .
Bil'ibin settled down comfortably beside the fire .
Bil'ibin was a man of thirty - five , a bachelor , and of the same circle as Prince Andrew .
They had known each other previously in Petersburg , but had become more intimate when Prince Andrew was in Vienna with Kut'uzov .
Just as Prince Andrew was a young man who gave promise of rising high in the military profession , so to an even greater extent Bil'ibin gave promise of rising in his diplomatic career .
Both the foreign minister and our ambassador in Vienna knew him and valued him .
He was not one of those many diplomats who are esteemed because they have certain negative qualities , avoid doing certain things , and speak French .
He was one of those , who , liking work , knew how to do it , and despite his indolence would sometimes spend a whole night at his writing table .
He worked well whatever the import of his work .
It was not the question " What for ? " but the question "
How ? " that interested him .
What the diplomatic matter might be he did not care , but it gave him great pleasure to prepare a circular , memorandum , or report , skillfully , pointedly , and elegantly .
Bil'ibin 's services were valued not only for what he wrote , but also for his skill in dealing and conversing with those in the highest spheres .
Bil'ibin liked conversation as he liked work , only when it could be made elegantly witty .
In society he always awaited an opportunity to say something striking and took part in a conversation only when that was possible .
His conversation was always sprinkled with wittily original , finished phrases of general interest .
These sayings were prepared in the inner laboratory of his mind in a portable form as if intentionally , so that insignificant society people might carry them from drawing room to drawing room .
And , in fact , Bil'ibin 's witticisms were hawked about in the Viennese drawing rooms and often had an influence on matters considered important .
His thin , worn , sallow face was covered with deep wrinkles , which always looked as clean and well washed as the tips of one 's fingers after a Russian bath .
The movement of these wrinkles formed the principal play of expression on his face .
Now his forehead would pucker into deep folds and his eyebrows were lifted , then his eyebrows would descend and deep wrinkles would crease his cheeks .
His small , deep - set eyes always twinkled and looked out straight .
" Well , now tell me about your exploits , " said he .
Bolk'onski , very modestly without once mentioning himself , described the engagement and his reception by the Minister of War .
" They received me and my news as one receives a dog in a game of skittles , " said he in conclusion .
Bil'ibin smiled and the wrinkles on his face disappeared .
*
* " But my dear fellow , with all my respect for the Orthodox Russian army , I must say that your victory was not particularly victorious . "
He went on talking in this way in French , uttering only those words in Russian on which he wished to put a contemptuous emphasis .
" Come now !
You with all your forces fall on the unfortunate Mortier and his one division , and even then Mortier slips through your fingers !
Where 's the victory ? "
" But seriously , " said Prince Andrew , " we can at any rate say without boasting that it was a little better than at Ulm ... "
" Why did n't you capture one , just one , marshal for us ? "
" Because not everything happens as one expects or with the smoothness of a parade .
We had expected , as I told you , to get at their rear by seven in the morning but had not reached it by five in the afternoon . "
" And why did n't you do it at seven in the morning ?
You ought to have been there at seven in the morning , " returned Bil'ibin with a smile .
" You ought to have been there at seven in the morning . "
" Why did you not succeed in impressing on Bonaparte by diplomatic methods that he had better leave Genoa alone ? " retorted Prince Andrew in the same tone .
" I know , " interrupted Bil'ibin , " you 're thinking it 's very easy to take marshals , sitting on a sofa by the fire !
That is true , but still why did n't you capture him ?
So do n't be surprised if not only the Minister of War but also his Most August Majesty the Emperor and King Francis is not much delighted by your victory .
Even I , a poor secretary of the Russian Embassy , do not feel any need in token of my joy to give my Franz a thaler , or let him go with his Liebchen to the Prater ...
True , we have no Prater here ... "
He looked straight at Prince Andrew and suddenly unwrinkled his forehead .
" It is now my turn to ask you ' why ? ' mon cher , " said Bolk'onski .
" I confess I do not understand : perhaps there are diplomatic subtleties here beyond my feeble intelligence , but I ca n't make it out .
Mack loses a whole army , the Archduke Ferdinand and the Archduke Karl give no signs of life and make blunder after blunder .
Kut'uzov
alone at last gains a real victory , destroying the spell of the invincibility of the French , and the Minister of War does not even care to hear the details . "
" That 's just it , my dear fellow .
You see it 's hurrah for the Tsar , for Russia , for the Orthodox Greek faith !
All that is beautiful , but what do we , I mean the Austrian court , care for your victories ?
and we 'll fire off some cannon !
But this sort of thing seems done on purpose to vex us .
The Archduke Karl does nothing , the Archduke Ferdinand disgraces himself .
You abandon Vienna , give up its defense - as much as to say : ' Heaven is with us , but heaven help you and your capital ! '
The one general whom we all loved , Schmidt , you expose to a bullet , and then you congratulate us on the victory !
Admit that more irritating news than yours could not have been conceived .
It 's as if it had been done on purpose , on purpose .
Besides , suppose you did gain a brilliant victory , if even the Archduke Karl gained a victory , what effect would that have on the general course of events ?
It 's too late now when Vienna is occupied by the French army ! "
" What ?
Occupied ?
Vienna occupied ? "
" Not only occupied , but Bonaparte is at Sch"onbrunn , and the count , our dear Count Vrbna , goes to him for orders . "
After the fatigues and impressions of the journey , his reception , and especially after having dined , Bolk'onski felt that he could not take in the full significance of the words he heard .
" Count Lichtenfels was here this morning , " Bil'ibin continued , " and showed me a letter in which the parade of the French in Vienna was fully described : Prince Murat
et tout le tremblement ...
You see that your victory is not a matter for great rejoicing and that you ca n't be received as a savior . "
" How is it Vienna was taken ?
What of the bridge and its celebrated bridgehead and Prince Auersperg ?
We heard reports that Prince Auersperg was defending Vienna ? " he said .
" Prince Auersperg is on this , on our side of the river , and is defending us - doing it very badly , I think , but still he is defending us .
But Vienna is on the other side .
No , the bridge has not yet been taken and I hope it will not be , for it is mined and orders have been given to blow it up .
Otherwise we should long ago have been in the mountains of Bohemia , and you and your army would have spent a bad quarter of an hour between two fires . "
" But still this does not mean that the campaign is over , " said Prince Andrew .
" Well , I think it is .
The bigwigs here think so too , but they dare n't say so .
" The only question is what will come of the meeting between the Emperor Alexander and the King of Prussia in Berlin ?
If Prussia joins the Allies , Austria 's hand will be forced and there will be war .
If not it is merely a question of settling where the preliminaries of the new Campo Formio are to be drawn up . "
" What an extraordinary genius ! "
Prince Andrew suddenly exclaimed , clenching his small hand and striking the table with it , " and what luck the man has ! "
" Buonaparte ? " said Bil'ibin inquiringly , puckering up his forehead to indicate that he was about to say something witty . "
Buonaparte ? " he repeated , accentuating the u : " I think , however , now that he lays down laws for Austria at Sch"onbrunn , il faut lui faire gr^ace de l'u !
* I shall certainly adopt an innovation and call him simply Bonaparte ! "
* " We must let him off the u ! "
" But joking apart , " said Prince Andrew , " do you really think the campaign is over ? "
" This is what I think .
Austria has been made a fool of , and she is not used to it .
She will retaliate .
And therefore - this is between ourselves -
I instinctively feel that we are being deceived , my instinct tells me of negotiations with France and projects for peace , a secret peace concluded separately . "
* Fine eyes .
" Impossible ! " cried Prince Andrew .
" That would be too base . "
" If we live we shall see , " replied Bil'ibin , his face again becoming smooth as a sign that the conversation was at an end .
The alliance with Prussia , Austria 's treachery , Bonaparte 's new triumph , tomorrow 's levee and parade , and the audience with the Emperor Francis occupied his thoughts .
He woke up ...
" Yes , that all happened ! "
he said , and , smiling happily to himself like a child , he fell into a deep , youthful slumber .
CHAPTER XI
Next day he woke late .
Having dressed for his attendance at court in full parade uniform , which he had not worn for a long time , he went into Bil'ibin 's study fresh , animated , and handsome , with his hand bandaged .
In the study were four gentlemen of the diplomatic corps .
With Prince Hippolyte Kur'agin , who was a secretary to the embassy , Bolk'onski was already acquainted .
Bil'ibin introduced him to the others .
The gentlemen assembled at Bil'ibin 's were young , wealthy , gay society men , who here , as in Vienna , formed a special set which Bil'ibin , their leader , called les n^otres .
These gentlemen received Prince Andrew as one of themselves , an honor they did not extend to many .
From politeness and to start conversation , they asked him a few questions about the army and the battle , and then the talk went off into merry jests and gossip .
* Ours .
Can you fancy the figure he cut ? ... "
" But the worst of it , gentlemen - I am giving Kur'agin away to you - is that that man suffers , and this Don Juan , wicked fellow , is taking advantage of it ! "
Prince Hippolyte was lolling in a lounge chair with his legs over its arm .
He began to laugh .
" Tell me about that ! " he said .
" Oh , you Don Juan !
You serpent ! " cried several voices .
" La femme est la compagne de l'homme , " * announced Prince Hippolyte , and began looking through a lorgnette at his elevated legs .
* " Woman is man 's companion . "
" Oh , I must give you a treat , " Bil'ibin whispered to Bolk'onski . "
Kur'agin is exquisite when he discusses politics - you should see his gravity ! "
He sat down beside Hippolyte and wrinkling his forehead began talking to him about politics .
Prince Andrew and the others gathered round these two .
" The Berlin cabinet can not express a feeling of alliance , " began Hippolyte gazing round with importance at the others , " without expressing ... as in its last note ...
you understand ...
Besides , unless His Majesty the Emperor derogates from the principle of our alliance ...
" Wait , I have not finished ... " he said to Prince Andrew , seizing him by the arm , " I believe that intervention will be stronger than nonintervention .
And ... " he paused . "
Finally one can not impute the nonreceipt of our dispatch of November 18 .
That is how it will end . "
And he released Bolk'onski 's arm to indicate that he had now quite finished .
" Demosthenes , I know thee by the pebble thou secretest in thy golden mouth ! " said Bil'ibin , and the mop of hair on his head moved with satisfaction .
Everybody laughed , and Hippolyte louder than anyone .
He was evidently distressed , and breathed painfully , but could not restrain the wild laughter that convulsed his usually impassive features .
" Well now , gentlemen , " said Bil'ibin , " Bolk'onski is my guest in this house and in Br"unn itself .
I want to entertain him as far as I can , with all the pleasures of life here .
If we were in Vienna it would be easy , but here , in this wretched Moravian hole , it is more difficult , and I beg you all to help me .
Br"unn 's attractions must be shown him .
You can undertake the theater , I society , and you , Hippolyte , of course the women . "
" We must let him see Amelie , she 's exquisite ! " said one of " ours , " kissing his finger tips .
" In general we must turn this bloodthirsty soldier to more humane interests , " said Bil'ibin .
" I shall scarcely be able to avail myself of your hospitality , gentlemen , it is already time for me to go , " replied Prince Andrew looking at his watch .
" Where to ? "
" To the Emperor . "
" Oh !
Oh !
Oh ! "
" Well , au revoir , Bolk'onski !
Au revoir , Prince !
Come back early to dinner , " cried several voices .
" We 'll take you in hand . "
" When speaking to the Emperor , try as far as you can to praise the way that provisions are supplied and the routes indicated , " said Bil'ibin , accompanying him to the hall .
" I should like to speak well of them , but as far as I know the facts , I ca n't , " replied Bolk'onski , smiling .
" Well , talk as much as you can , anyway .
He has a passion for giving audiences , but he does not like talking himself and ca n't do it , as you will see . "
CHAPTER XII
At the levee Prince Andrew stood among the Austrian officers as he had been told to , and the Emperor Francis merely looked fixedly into his face and just nodded to him with his long head .
But after it was over , the adjutant he had seen the previous day ceremoniously informed Bolk'onski that the Emperor desired to give him an audience .
The Emperor Francis received him standing in the middle of the room .
Before the conversation began Prince Andrew was struck by the fact that the Emperor seemed confused and blushed as if not knowing what to say .
" Tell me , when did the battle begin ? " he asked hurriedly .
Prince Andrew replied .
Then followed other questions just as simple : " Was Kut'uzov
well ?
When had he left Krems ? "
and so on .
The Emperor spoke as if his sole aim were to put a given number of questions - the answers to these questions , as was only too evident , did not interest him .
" At what o'clock did the battle begin ? " asked the Emperor .
But the Emperor smiled and interrupted him .
" How many miles ? "
" From where to where , Your Majesty ? "
" From D"urrenstein to Krems . "
" Three and a half miles , Your Majesty . "
" The French have abandoned the left bank ? "
" According to the scouts the last of them crossed on rafts during the night . "
" Is there sufficient forage in Krems ? "
" Forage has not been supplied to the extent ... "
The Emperor interrupted him .
" At what o'clock was General Schmidt killed ? "
" At seven o'clock , I believe . "
" At seven o'clock ?
It 's very sad , very sad ! "
The Emperor thanked Prince Andrew and bowed .
Prince Andrew withdrew and was immediately surrounded by courtiers on all sides .
Everywhere he saw friendly looks and heard friendly words .
Yesterday 's adjutant reproached him for not having stayed at the palace , and offered him his own house .
The Minister of War came up and congratulated him on the Maria Theresa Order of the third grade , which the Emperor was conferring on him .
The Empress ' chamberlain invited him to see Her Majesty .
The archduchess also wished to see him .
He did not know whom to answer , and for a few seconds collected his thoughts .
Then the Russian ambassador took him by the shoulder , led him to the window , and began to talk to him .
Contrary to Bil'ibin 's forecast the news he had brought was joyfully received .
A thanksgiving service was arranged , Kut'uzov was awarded the Grand Cross of Maria Theresa , and the whole army received rewards .
Bolk'onski was invited everywhere , and had to spend the whole morning calling on the principal Austrian dignitaries .
Between four and five in the afternoon , having made all his calls , he was returning to Bil'ibin 's house thinking out a letter to his father about the battle and his visit to Br"unn .
At the door he found a vehicle half full of luggage .
Franz , Bil'ibin 's man , was dragging a portmanteau with some difficulty out of the front door .
Before returning to Bil'ibin 's Prince Andrew had gone to a bookshop to provide himself with some books for the campaign , and had spent some time in the shop .
" What is it ? " he asked .
" Oh , your excellency ! " said Franz , with difficulty rolling the portmanteau into the vehicle , " we are to move on still farther .
The scoundrel is again at our heels ! "
" Eh ? What ? " asked Prince Andrew .
Bil'ibin came out to meet him .
His usually calm face showed excitement .
" There now !
Confess that this is delightful , " said he . "
This affair of the Thabor Bridge , at Vienna ....
They have crossed without striking a blow ! "
Prince Andrew could not understand .
" But where do you come from not to know what every coachman in the town knows ? "
" I come from the archduchess ' .
I heard nothing there . "
" And you did n't see that everybody is packing up ? "
" I did not ...
What is it all about ? " inquired Prince Andrew impatiently .
" What 's it all about ?
" What ?
Here ?
But why did they not blow up the bridge , if it was mined ? "
" That is what I ask you .
No one , not even Bonaparte , knows why . "
Bolk'onski shrugged his shoulders .
" But if the bridge is crossed it means that the army too is lost ?
It will be cut off , " said he .
" That 's just it , " answered Bil'ibin . "
Listen !
The French entered Vienna as I told you .
Very well .
Next day , which was yesterday , those gentlemen , messieurs les mar'echaux , * Murat , Lannes , and Belliard , mount and ride to the bridge .
But it will please our sovereign the Emperor Napoleon if we take this bridge , so let us three go and take it ! ' '
Yes , let 's ! '
say the others .
And off they go and take the bridge , cross it , and now with their whole army are on this side of the Danube , marching on us , you , and your lines of communication . "
* The marshalls .
" Stop jesting , " said Prince Andrew sadly and seriously .
This news grieved him and yet he was pleased .
Listening to Bil'ibin
" Stop this jesting , " he said .
" I am not jesting , " Bil'ibin went on .
" Nothing is truer or sadder .
These gentlemen ride onto the bridge alone and wave white handkerchiefs ; they assure the officer on duty that they , the marshals , are on their way to negotiate with Prince Auersperg .
He lets them enter the t^ete - de - pont .
* They spin him a thousand gasconades , saying that the war is over , that the Emperor Francis is arranging a meeting with Bonaparte , that they desire to see Prince Auersperg , and so on .
At length appears the lieutenant general , our dear Prince Auersperg von Mautern himself . '
Dearest foe !
Flower of the Austrian army , hero of the Turkish wars !
Hostilities are ended , we can shake one another 's hand ....
The Emperor Napoleon burns with impatience to make Prince Auersperg 's acquaintance . '
* ( 2 )
In spite of the animation of his speech , Bil'ibin did not forget to pause after this mot to give time for its due appreciation .
" The French battalion rushes to the bridgehead , spikes the guns , and the bridge is taken !
The sergeant , who was evidently wiser than his general , goes up to Auersperg and says : ' Prince , you are being deceived , here are the French ! '
It was a stroke of genius .
Prince Auersperg feels his dignity at stake and orders the sergeant to be arrested .
Come , you must own that this affair of the Thabor Bridge is delightful !
It is not exactly stupidity , nor rascality .... "
* Bridgehead .
* ( 2 ) That their fire gets into his eyes and he forgets that he ought to be firing at the enemy .
" It may be treachery , " said Prince Andrew , vividly imagining the gray overcoats , wounds , the smoke of gunpowder , the sounds of firing , and the glory that awaited him .
" Not that either .
That puts the court in too bad a light , " replied Bil'ibin .
" It 's not treachery nor rascality nor stupidity : it is just as at Ulm ...
it is ... "-he seemed to be trying to find the right expression . "
C'est ... c'est du Mack .
Nous sommes mack'es ( It is ... it is a bit of Mack .
We are Macked ) , " he concluded , feeling that he had produced a good epigram , a fresh one that would be repeated .
His hitherto puckered brow became smooth as a sign of pleasure , and with a slight smile he began to examine his nails .
" Where are you off to ? " he said suddenly to Prince Andrew who had risen and was going toward his room .
" I am going away . "
" Where to ? "
" To the army . "
" But you meant to stay another two days ? "
" But now I am off at once . "
And Prince Andrew after giving directions about his departure went to his room .
" Do you know , mon cher , " said Bil'ibin following him , " I have been thinking about you .
Why are you going ? "
And in proof of the conclusiveness of his opinion all the wrinkles vanished from his face .
Prince Andrew looked inquiringly at him and gave no reply .
" Why are you going ?
I know you think it your duty to gallop back to the army now that it is in danger .
I understand that .
Mon cher , it is heroism ! "
" Not at all , " said Prince Andrew .
" But as you are a philosopher , be a consistent one , look at the other side of the question and you will see that your duty , on the contrary , is to take care of yourself .
Leave it to those who are no longer fit for anything else ....
You have not been ordered to return and have not been dismissed from here ; therefore , you can stay and go with us wherever our ill luck takes us .
They say we are going to Olm"utz , and Olm"utz is a very decent town .
You and I will travel comfortably in my cal`eche . "
" Do stop joking , Bil'ibin , " cried Bolk'onski .
" I am speaking sincerely as a friend !
Consider !
Where and why are you going , when you might remain here ?
And Bil'ibin unwrinkled his temple , feeling that the dilemma was insoluble .
" I can not argue about it , " replied Prince Andrew coldly , but he thought : " I am going to save the army . "
" My dear fellow , you are a hero ! " said Bil'ibin .
CHAPTER XIII
In Br"unn everybody attached to the court was packing up , and the heavy baggage was already being dispatched to Olm"utz .
Near Hetzelsdorf Prince Andrew struck the high road along which the Russian army was moving with great haste and in the greatest disorder .
The road was so obstructed with carts that it was impossible to get by in a carriage .
Prince Andrew took a horse and a Cossack from a Cossack commander , and hungry and weary , making his way past the baggage wagons , rode in search of the commander in chief and of his own luggage .
Very sinister reports of the position of the army reached him as he went along , and the appearance of the troops in their disorderly flight confirmed these rumors .
" Cette arm'ee russe que l'or de l'Angleterre a transport'ee des extr'emit'es de l'univers , nous allons lui faire ' eprouver le m^eme sort-(le sort de l'arm'ee d'Ulm ) .
"
*
And should there be nothing left but to die ?
" he thought .
" Well , if need be , I shall do it no worse than others . "
* " That Russian army which has been brought from the ends of the earth by English gold , we shall cause to share the same fate-(the fate of the army at Ulm ) . "
At each ascent or descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and the din of shouting more incessant .
Soldiers floundering knee - deep in mud pushed the guns and wagons themselves .
Whips cracked , hoofs slipped , traces broke , and lungs were strained with shouting .
The officers directing the march rode backward and forward between the carts .
Their voices were but feebly heard amid the uproar and one saw by their faces that they despaired of the possibility of checking this disorder .
" Here is our dear Orthodox Russian army , " thought Bolk'onski , recalling Bil'ibin 's words .
Wishing to find out where the commander in chief was , he rode up to a convoy .
Directly opposite to him came a strange one - horse vehicle , evidently rigged up by soldiers out of any available materials and looking like something between a cart , a cabriolet , and a cal`eche .
A soldier was driving , and a woman enveloped in shawls sat behind the apron under the leather hood of the vehicle .
Prince Andrew rode up and was just putting his question to a soldier when his attention was diverted by the desperate shrieks of the woman in the vehicle .
An officer in charge of transport was beating the soldier who was driving the woman 's vehicle for trying to get ahead of others , and the strokes of his whip fell on the apron of the equipage .
The woman screamed piercingly .
Seeing Prince Andrew she leaned out from behind the apron and , waving her thin arms from under the woolen shawl , cried :
" Mr. Aide - de - camp !
Mr. Aide - de - camp ! ...
For heaven 's sake ...
Protect me !
What will become of us ?
I am the wife of the doctor of the Seventh Chasseurs ....
They wo n't let us pass , we are left behind and have lost our people ... "
" I 'll flatten you into a pancake ! " shouted the angry officer to the soldier .
" Turn back with your slut ! "
" Mr. Aide - de - camp !
Help me ! ...
What does it all mean ? " screamed the doctor 's wife .
" Kindly let this cart pass .
Do n't you see it 's a woman ? " said Prince Andrew riding up to the officer .
The officer glanced at him , and without replying turned again to the soldier .
" I 'll teach you to push on ! ...
Back ! "
" Let them pass , I tell you ! "
repeated Prince Andrew , compressing his lips .
" And who are you ? "
cried the officer , turning on him with tipsy rage , " who are you ?
Are you in command here ?
Eh ?
I am commander here , not you !
Go back
or I 'll flatten you into a pancake , " repeated he .
This expression evidently pleased him .
" That was a nice snub for the little aide - de - camp , " came a voice from behind .
Prince Andrew saw that the officer was in that state of senseless , tipsy rage when a man does not know what he is saying .
He saw that his championship of the doctor 's wife in her queer trap might expose him to what he dreaded more than anything in the world - to ridicule ; but his instinct urged him on .
Before the officer finished his sentence Prince Andrew , his face distorted with fury , rode up to him and raised his riding whip .
" Kind ... ly let - them - pass ! "
The officer flourished his arm and hastily rode away .
" It 's all the fault of these fellows on the staff that there 's this disorder , " he muttered .
"
Do as you like . "
On reaching the village he dismounted and went to the nearest house , intending to rest if but for a moment , eat something , and try to sort out the stinging and tormenting thoughts that confused his mind .
" This is a mob of scoundrels and not an army , " he was thinking as he went up to the window of the first house , when a familiar voice called him by name .
He turned round .
Nesv'itski 's handsome face looked out of the little window .
Nesv'itski , moving his moist lips as he chewed something , and flourishing his arm , called him to enter .
" Bolk'onski ! Bolk'onski ! ...
Do n't you hear ?
Eh ?
Come quick ... " he shouted .
Entering the house , Prince Andrew saw Nesv'itski and another adjutant having something to eat .
They hastily turned round to him asking if he had any news .
On their familiar faces he read agitation and alarm .
This was particularly noticeable on Nesv'itski 's usually laughing countenance .
" Where is the commander in chief ? " asked Bolk'onski .
" Here , in that house , " answered the adjutant .
" Well , is it true that it 's peace and capitulation ? " asked Nesv'itski .
" I was going to ask you .
I know nothing except that it was all I could do to get here . "
" And we , my dear boy !
It 's terrible !
I was wrong to laugh at Mack , we 're getting it still worse , " said Nesv'itski .
" But sit down and have something to eat . "
" You wo n't be able to find either your baggage or anything else now , Prince .
And God only knows where your man Peter is , " said the other adjutant .
" Where are headquarters ? "
" We are to spend the night in Znaim . "
" Well , I have got all I need into packs for two horses , " said Nesv'itski .
" They 've made up splendid packs for me - fit to cross the Bohemian mountains with .
It 's a bad lookout , old fellow !
But what 's the matter with you ?
You must be ill to shiver like that , " he added , noticing that Prince Andrew winced as at an electric shock .
" It 's nothing , " replied Prince Andrew .
He had just remembered his recent encounter with the doctor 's wife and the convoy officer .
" What is the commander in chief doing here ? " he asked .
" I ca n't make out at all , " said Nesv'itski .
" Well , all I can make out is that everything is abominable , abominable , quite abominable ! " said Prince Andrew , and he went off to the house where the commander in chief was .
Passing by Kut'uzov 's carriage and the exhausted saddle horses of his suite , with their Cossacks who were talking loudly together , Prince Andrew entered the passage .
Kut'uzov himself , he was told , was in the house with Prince Bagrati'on and Weyrother .
Weyrother was the Austrian general who had succeeded Schmidt .
In the passage little Kozl'ovski was squatting on his heels in front of a clerk .
The clerk , with cuffs turned up , was hastily writing at a tub turned bottom upwards .
Kozl'ovski 's face looked worn - he too had evidently not slept all night .
He glanced at Prince Andrew and did not even nod to him .
" Second line ... have you written it ? " he continued dictating to the clerk . "
The Kiev Grenadiers , Podolian ... "
" One ca n't write so fast , your honor , " said the clerk , glancing angrily and disrespectfully at Kozl'ovski .
Through the door came the sounds of Kut'uzov 's voice , excited and dissatisfied , interrupted by another , an unfamiliar voice .
He turned to Kozl'ovski with urgent questions .
" Immediately , Prince , " said Kozl'ovski .
" Dispositions for Bagrati'on . "
" What about capitulation ? "
" Nothing of the sort .
Orders are issued for a battle . "
Prince Andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard .
Just as he was going to open it the sounds ceased , the door opened , and Kut'uzov with his eagle nose and puffy face appeared in the doorway .
Prince Andrew stood right in front of Kut'uzov but the expression of the commander in chief 's one sound eye showed him to be so preoccupied with thoughts and anxieties as to be oblivious of his presence .
He looked straight at his adjutant 's face without recognizing him .
" Well , have you finished ? " said he to Kozl'ovski .
" One moment , your excellency . "
Bagrati'on , a gaunt middle - aged man of medium height with a firm , impassive face of Oriental type , came out after the commander in chief .
" I have the honor to present myself , " repeated Prince Andrew rather loudly , handing Kut'uzov an envelope .
" Ah , from Vienna ?
Very good .
Later , later ! "
Kut'uzov went out into the porch with Bagrati'on .
" Well , good - by , Prince , " said he to Bagrati'on .
" My blessing , and may Christ be with you in your great endeavor ! "
His face suddenly softened and tears came into his eyes .
" Christ be with you ! "
Kut'uzov repeated and went toward his carriage . "
Get in with me , " said he to Bolk'onski .
" Your excellency , I should like to be of use here .
Allow me to remain with Prince Bagrati'on 's detachment . "
" Get in , " said Kut'uzov , and noticing that Bolk'onski still delayed , he added : " I need good officers myself , need them myself ! "
They got into the carriage and drove for a few minutes in silence .
" There is still much , much before us , " he said , as if with an old man 's penetration he understood all that was passing in Bolk'onski 's mind .
" If a tenth part of his detachment returns I shall thank God , " he added as if speaking to himself .
Yes , he has a right to speak so calmly of those men 's death , " thought Bolk'onski .
" That is why I beg to be sent to that detachment , " he said .
Kut'uzov did not reply .
He seemed to have forgotten what he had been saying , and sat plunged in thought .
Five minutes later , gently swaying on the soft springs of the carriage , he turned to Prince Andrew .
There was not a trace of agitation on his face .
With delicate irony he questioned Prince Andrew about the details of his interview with the Emperor , about the remarks he had heard at court concerning the Krems affair , and about some ladies they both knew .
CHAPTER XIV
On November 1 Kut'uzov had received , through a spy , news that the army he commanded was in an almost hopeless position .
The spy reported that the French , after crossing the bridge at Vienna , were advancing in immense force upon Kut'uzov 's line of communication with the troops that were arriving from Russia .
Kut'uzov chose this latter course .
The French , the spy reported , having crossed the Vienna bridge , were advancing by forced marches toward Znaim , which lay sixty - six miles off on the line of Kut'uzov 's retreat .
But to forestall the French with his whole army was impossible .
The road for the French from Vienna to Znaim was shorter and better than the road for the Russians from Krems to Znaim .
The night he received the news , Kut'uzov sent Bagrati'on 's vanguard , four thousand strong , to the right across the hills from the Krems - Znaim to the Vienna - Znaim road .
Bagrati'on was to make this march without resting , and to halt facing Vienna with Znaim to his rear , and if he succeeded in forestalling the French he was to delay them as long as possible .
Kut'uzov himself with all his transport took the road to Znaim .
Kut'uzov
with his transport had still to march for some days before he could reach Znaim .
Hence Bagrati'on with his four thousand hungry , exhausted men would have to detain for days the whole enemy army that came upon him at Hollabr"unn , which was clearly impossible .
But a freak of fate made the impossible possible .
The success of the trick that had placed the Vienna bridge in the hands of the French without a fight led Murat to try to deceive Kut'uzov in a similar way .
Meeting Bagrati'on 's weak detachment on the Znaim road he supposed it to be Kut'uzov 's whole army .
Murat declared that negotiations for peace were already proceeding , and that he therefore offered this truce to avoid unnecessary bloodshed .
Count Nostitz , the Austrian general occupying the advanced posts , believed Murat 's emissary and retired , leaving Bagrati'on 's division exposed .
Another emissary rode to the Russian line to announce the peace negotiations and to offer the Russian army the three days ' truce .
Bagrati'on replied that he was not authorized either to accept or refuse a truce and sent his adjutant to Kut'uzov to report the offer he had received .
The offer of a truce gave the only , and a quite unexpected , chance of saving the army .
On receiving the news he immediately dispatched Adjutant General Wintzingerode , who was in attendance on him , to the enemy camp .
Bagrati'on 's exhausted and hungry detachment , which alone covered this movement of the transport and of the whole army , had to remain stationary in face of an enemy eight times as strong as itself .
Sch"onbrunn , 25th Brumaire , 1805 ,
at eight o'clock in the morning
To PRINCE MURAT ,
I can not find words to express to you my displeasure .
You command only my advance guard , and have no right to arrange an armistice without my order .
You are causing me to lose the fruits of a campaign .
Break the armistice immediately and march on the enemy .
Inform him that the general who signed that capitulation had no right to do so , and that no one but the Emperor of Russia has that right .
If , however , the Emperor of Russia ratifies that convention , I will ratify it ; but it is only a trick .
March on , destroy the Russian army ....
You are in a position to seize its baggage and artillery .
The Russian Emperor 's aide - de - camp is an impostor .
Officers are nothing when they have no powers ; this one had none ....
The Austrians let themselves be tricked at the crossing of the Vienna bridge , you are letting yourself be tricked by an aide - de - camp of the Emperor .
NAPOLEON
Bonaparte 's adjutant rode full gallop with this menacing letter to Murat .
CHAPTER XV
Between three and four o'clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew , who had persisted in his request to Kut'uzov , arrived at Grunth and reported himself to Bagrati'on .
Bonaparte 's adjutant had not yet reached Murat 's detachment and the battle had not yet begun .
In Bagrati'on 's detachment no one knew anything of the general position of affairs .
They talked of peace but did not believe in its possibility ; others talked of a battle but also disbelieved in the nearness of an engagement .
" However , there will hardly be an engagement today , " said Bagrati'on as if to reassure Prince Andrew .
" If he is one of the ordinary little staff dandies sent to earn a medal he can get his reward just as well in the rearguard , but if he wishes to stay with me , let him ...
he 'll be of use here if he 's a brave officer , " thought Bagrati'on .
Prince Andrew , without replying , asked the prince 's permission to ride round the position to see the disposition of the forces , so as to know his bearings should he be sent to execute an order .
The officer on duty , a handsome , elegantly dressed man with a diamond ring on his forefinger , who was fond of speaking French though he spoke it badly , offered to conduct Prince Andrew .
On all sides they saw rain - soaked officers with dejected faces who seemed to be seeking something , and soldiers dragging doors , benches , and fencing from the village .
" There now , Prince !
We ca n't stop those fellows , " said the staff officer pointing to the soldiers .
" The officers do n't keep them in hand .
And there , " he pointed to a sutler 's tent , " they crowd in and sit .
This morning I turned them all out and now look , it 's full again .
I must go there , Prince , and scare them a bit .
It wo n't take a moment . "
" Yes , let 's go in and I will get myself a roll and some cheese , " said Prince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything .
" Why did n't you mention it , Prince ?
I would have offered you something . "
They dismounted and entered the tent .
Several officers , with flushed and weary faces , were sitting at the table eating and drinking .
" Now what does this mean , gentlemen ? " said the staff officer , in the reproachful tone of a man who has repeated the same thing more than once .
" You know it wo n't do to leave your posts like this .
The prince gave orders that no one should leave his post .
" Well , are n't you ashamed of yourself , Captain T'ushin ? " he continued .
" One would think that as an artillery officer you would set a good example , yet here you are without your boots !
The alarm will be sounded and you 'll be in a pretty position without your boots ! "
( The staff officer smiled . )
" Kindly return to your posts , gentlemen , all of you , all ! "
he added in a tone of command .
" The soldiers say it feels easier without boots , " said Captain T'ushin smiling shyly in his uncomfortable position , evidently wishing to adopt a jocular tone .
But before he had finished he felt that his jest was unacceptable and had not come off .
He grew confused .
" Kindly return to your posts , " said the staff officer trying to preserve his gravity .
Prince Andrew glanced again at the artillery officer 's small figure .
There was something peculiar about it , quite unsoldierly , rather comic , but extremely attractive .
The staff officer and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and rode on .
Having ridden beyond the village , continually meeting and overtaking soldiers and officers of various regiments , they saw on their left some entrenchments being thrown up , the freshly dug clay of which showed up red .
Prince Andrew and the officer rode up , looked at the entrenchment , and went on again .
Just behind it they came upon some dozens of soldiers , continually replaced by others , who ran from the entrenchment .
They had to hold their noses and put their horses to a trot to escape from the poisoned atmosphere of these latrines .
" Voil`a l'agr'ement des camps , monsieur le prince , " * said the staff officer .
* " This is a pleasure one gets in camp , Prince . "
They rode up the opposite hill .
From there the French could already be seen .
Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the position .
" That 's our battery , " said the staff officer indicating the highest point .
" It 's in charge of the queer fellow we saw without his boots .
You can see everything from there ; let 's go there , Prince . "
" Thank you very much , I will go on alone , " said Prince Andrew , wishing to rid himself of this staff officer 's company , " please do n't trouble yourself further . "
The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone .
The farther forward and nearer the enemy he went , the more orderly and cheerful were the troops .
The greatest disorder and depression had been in the baggage train he had passed that morning on the Znaim road seven miles away from the French .
At Grunth also some apprehension and alarm could be felt , but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French lines the more confident was the appearance of our troops .
The soldiers in their greatcoats were ranged in lines , the sergeants major and company officers were counting the men , poking the last man in each section in the ribs and telling him to hold his hand up .
Two soldiers held him while two others were flourishing their switches and striking him regularly on his bare back .
The man shrieked unnaturally .
A stout major was pacing up and down the line , and regardless of the screams kept repeating :
" It 's a shame for a soldier to steal ; a soldier must be honest , honorable , and brave , but if he robs his fellows there is no honor in him , he 's a scoundrel .
Go on !
Go on ! "
So the swishing sound of the strokes , and the desperate but unnatural screams , continued .
" Go on , go on ! " said the major .
A young officer with a bewildered and pained expression on his face stepped away from the man and looked round inquiringly at the adjutant as he rode by .
Prince Andrew , having reached the front line , rode along it .
Besides the soldiers who formed the picket line on either side , there were many curious onlookers who , jesting and laughing , stared at their strange foreign enemies .
Since early morning - despite an injunction not to approach the picket line - the officers had been unable to keep sight - seers away .
The soldiers forming the picket line , like showmen exhibiting a curiosity , no longer looked at the French but paid attention to the sight - seers and grew weary waiting to be relieved .
Prince Andrew halted to have a look at the French .
" Look !
Look there ! "
one soldier was saying to another , pointing to a Russian musketeer who had gone up to the picket line with an officer and was rapidly and excitedly talking to a French grenadier . "
Hark to him jabbering !
Fine , is n't it ?
It 's all the Frenchy can do to keep up with him .
There now , S'idorov ! "
" Wait a bit and listen .
It 's fine ! "
answered S'idorov , who was considered an adept at French .
The soldier to whom the laughers referred was D'olokhov .
Prince Andrew recognized him and stopped to listen to what he was saying .
D'olokhov had come from the left flank where their regiment was stationed , with his captain .
" Now then , go on , go on ! "
incited the officer , bending forward and trying not to lose a word of the speech which was incomprehensible to him .
" More , please : more !
What 's he saying ? "
D'olokhov did not answer the captain ; he had been drawn into a hot dispute with the French grenadier .
They were naturally talking about the campaign .
" We have orders to drive you off here , and we shall drive you off , " said D'olokhov .
" Only take care you and your Cossacks are not all captured ! " said the French grenadier .
The French onlookers and listeners laughed .
" We 'll make you dance as we did under Suv'orov ... , " * said D'olokhov .
* " On vous fera danser . "
" Qu ' est - ce qu'il chante ? "
* asked a Frenchman .
* " What 's he singing about ? "
" It 's ancient history , " said another , guessing that it referred to a former war .
" The Emperor will teach your Suvara as he has taught the others ... "
" Bonaparte ... " began D'olokhov , but the Frenchman interrupted him .
" Not Bonaparte .
He is the Emperor !
Sacr'e nom ... ! " cried he angrily .
" The devil skin your Emperor . "
And D'olokhov swore at him in coarse soldier 's Russian and shouldering his musket walked away .
" Let us go , Iv'an Luk'ich , " he said to the captain .
" Ah , that 's the way to talk French , " said the picket soldiers .
" Now , S'idorov , you have a try ! "
" Ho ! ho !
ho !
Ha !
ha !
ha !
ha !
Ouh ! ouh ! "
But the guns remained loaded , the loopholes in blockhouses and entrenchments looked out just as menacingly , and the unlimbered cannon confronted one another as before .
CHAPTER XVI
Having ridden round the whole line from right flank to left , Prince Andrew made his way up to the battery from which the staff officer had told him the whole field could be seen .
Here he dismounted , and stopped beside the farthest of the four unlimbered cannon .
Before the guns an artillery sentry was pacing up and down ; he stood at attention when the officer arrived , but at a sign resumed his measured , monotonous pacing .
Behind the guns were their limbers and still farther back picket ropes and artillerymen 's bonfires .
To the left , not far from the farthest cannon , was a small , newly constructed wattle shed from which came the sound of officers ' voices in eager conversation .
It was true that a view over nearly the whole Russian position and the greater part of the enemy 's opened out from this battery .
To the left from that village , amid the smoke , was something resembling a battery , but it was impossible to see it clearly with the naked eye .
Our right flank was posted on a rather steep incline which dominated the French position .
Our infantry were stationed there , and at the farthest point the dragoons .
In the center , where T'ushin 's battery stood and from which Prince Andrew was surveying the position , was the easiest and most direct descent and ascent to the brook separating us from Sch"on Grabern .
On the left our troops were close to a copse , in which smoked the bonfires of our infantry who were felling wood .
The French line was wider than ours , and it was plain that they could easily outflank us on both sides .
Behind our position was a steep and deep dip , making it difficult for artillery and cavalry to retire .
Prince Andrew took out his notebook and , leaning on the cannon , sketched a plan of the position .
He made some notes on two points , intending to mention them to Bagrati'on .
His idea was , first , to concentrate all the artillery in the center , and secondly , to withdraw the cavalry to the other side of the dip .
In that case the dragoons could successfully make a flank counterattack .
If they attack our center we , having the center battery on this high ground , shall withdraw the left flank under its cover , and retreat to the dip by echelons . "
So he reasoned ....
All the time he had been beside the gun , he had heard the voices of the officers distinctly , but as often happens had not understood a word of what they were saying .
Suddenly , however , he was struck by a voice coming from the shed , and its tone was so sincere that he could not but listen .
That 's so , friend . "
Another , a younger voice , interrupted him : " Afraid or not , you ca n't escape it anyhow . "
" All the same , one is afraid !
Oh , you clever people , " said a third manly voice interrupting them both .
" Of course you artillery men are very wise , because you can take everything along with you - vodka and snacks . "
And the owner of the manly voice , evidently an infantry officer , laughed .
" Yes , one is afraid , " continued the first speaker , he of the familiar voice .
" One is afraid of the unknown , that 's what it is .
Whatever we may say about the soul going to the sky ... we know there is no sky but only an atmosphere . "
The manly voice again interrupted the artillery officer .
" Well , stand us some of your herb vodka , T'ushin , " it said .
" Why , " thought Prince Andrew , " that 's the captain who stood up in the sutler 's hut without his boots . "
He recognized the agreeable , philosophizing voice with pleasure .
" Some herb vodka ?
Certainly ! " said T'ushin . "
But still , to conceive a future life ... "
He did not finish .
The ground seemed to groan at the terrible impact .
CHAPTER XVII
Mounting his horse again Prince Andrew lingered with the battery , looking at the puff from the gun that had sent the ball .
His eyes ran rapidly over the wide space , but he only saw that the hitherto motionless masses of the French now swayed and that there really was a battery to their left .
The smoke above it had not yet dispersed .
Two mounted Frenchmen , probably adjutants , were galloping up the hill .
A small but distinctly visible enemy column was moving down the hill , probably to strengthen the front line .
The smoke of the first shot had not yet dispersed before another puff appeared , followed by a report .
The battle had begun !
Prince Andrew turned his horse and galloped back to Grunth to find Prince Bagrati'on .
He heard the cannonade behind him growing louder and more frequent .
Evidently our guns had begun to reply .
From the bottom of the slope , where the parleys had taken place , came the report of musketry .
" It has begun .
Here it is ! "
thought Prince Andrew , feeling the blood rush to his heart . "
But where and how will my Toulon present itself ? "
It has begun !
Here it is , dreadful but enjoyable !
" was what the face of each soldier and each officer seemed to say .
Before he had reached the embankments that were being thrown up , he saw , in the light of the dull autumn evening , mounted men coming toward him .
The foremost , wearing a Cossack cloak and lambskin cap and riding a white horse , was Prince Bagrati'on .
Prince Andrew stopped , waiting for him to come up ; Prince Bagrati'on reined in his horse and recognizing Prince Andrew nodded to him .
He still looked ahead while Prince Andrew told him what he had seen .
The feeling , " It has begun !
Here it is ! " was seen even on Prince Bagrati'on 's hard brown face with its half - closed , dull , sleepy eyes .
Prince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face and wished he could tell what , if anything , this man was thinking and feeling at that moment .
" Is there anything at all behind that impassive face ? "
Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked .
Prince Andrew , out of breath with his rapid ride , spoke quickly .
Prince Bagrati'on , uttering his words with an Oriental accent , spoke particularly slowly , as if to impress the fact that there was no need to hurry .
However , he put his horse to a trot in the direction of T'ushin 's battery .
Prince Andrew followed with the suite .
" He wants to see a battle , " said Zherk'ov to Bolk'onski , pointing to the accountant , " but he feels a pain in the pit of his stomach already . "
" It is very strange , mon Monsieur Prince , " said the staff officer .
( He remembered that in French there is some peculiar way of addressing a prince , but could not get it quite right . )
By this time they were all approaching T'ushin 's battery , and a ball struck the ground in front of them .
" What 's that that has fallen ? " asked the accountant with a na"ive smile .
" A French pancake , " answered Zherk'ov .
" So that 's what they hit with ? " asked the accountant . "
How awful ! "
He seemed to swell with satisfaction .
He had hardly finished speaking when they again heard an unexpectedly violent whistling which suddenly ended with a thud into something soft ...
f - f - flop ! and a Cossack , riding a little to their right and behind the accountant , crashed to earth with his horse .
Zherk'ov and the staff officer bent over their saddles and turned their horses away .
The accountant stopped , facing the Cossack , and examined him with attentive curiosity .
The Cossack was dead , but the horse still struggled .
Prince Bagrati'on screwed up his eyes , looked round , and , seeing the cause of the confusion , turned away with indifference , as if to say , " Is it worth while noticing trifles ? "
He reined in his horse with the care of a skillful rider and , slightly bending over , disengaged his saber which had caught in his cloak .
It was an old - fashioned saber of a kind no longer in general use .
Prince Andrew remembered the story of Suv'orov giving his saber to Bagrati'on in Italy , and the recollection was particularly pleasant at that moment .
They had reached the battery at which Prince Andrew had been when he examined the battlefield .
" Whose company ? " asked Prince Bagrati'on of an artilleryman standing by the ammunition wagon .
He asked , " Whose company ? " but he really meant , " Are you frightened here ? " and the artilleryman understood him .
" Captain T'ushin 's , your excellency ! " shouted the red - haired , freckled gunner in a merry voice , standing to attention .
" Yes , yes , " muttered Bagrati'on as if considering something , and he rode past the limbers to the farthest cannon .
The short , round - shouldered Captain T'ushin , stumbling over the tail of the gun carriage , moved forward and , not noticing the general , looked out shading his eyes with his small hand .
" Lift it two lines more and it will be just right , " cried he in a feeble voice to which he tried to impart a dashing note , ill - suited to his weak figure . "
Number Two !
" he squeaked .
" Fire , Medv'edev ! "
Bagrati'on called to him , and T'ushin , raising three fingers to his cap with a bashful and awkward gesture not at all like a military salute but like a priest 's benediction , approached the general .
Though T'ushin 's guns had been intended to cannonade the valley , he was firing incendiary balls at the village of Sch"on Grabern visible just opposite , in front of which large masses of French were advancing .
Very good ! "
said Bagrati'on in reply to the officer 's report , and began deliberately to examine the whole battlefield extended before him .
The French had advanced nearest on our right .
To the left the horizon bounded by the adjacent wood .
Prince Bagrati'on ordered two battalions from the center to be sent to reinforce the right flank .
The officer of the suite ventured to remark to the prince that if these battalions went away , the guns would remain without support .
Prince Bagrati'on turned to the officer and with his dull eyes looked at him in silence .
It seemed to Prince Andrew that the officer 's remark was just and that really no answer could be made to it .
Prince Bagrati'on bowed his head in sign of assent and approval .
He rode off at a walk to the right and sent an adjutant to the dragoons with orders to attack the French .
" Very good ! " said Bagrati'on .
About T'ushin and the battalion that had been in support of his battery all was forgotten .
Prince Andrew noticed , however , that though what happened was due to chance and was independent of the commander 's will , owing to the tact Bagrati'on showed , his presence was very valuable .
Officers who approached him with disturbed countenances became calm ; soldiers and officers greeted him gaily , grew more cheerful in his presence , and were evidently anxious to display their courage before him .
CHAPTER XVIII
Prince Bagrati'on , having reached the highest point of our right flank , began riding downhill to where the roll of musketry was heard but where on account of the smoke nothing could be seen .
The nearer they got to the hollow the less they could see but the more they felt the nearness of the actual battlefield .
They began to meet wounded men .
One with a bleeding head and no cap was being dragged along by two soldiers who supported him under the arms .
There was a gurgle in his throat and he was spitting blood .
A bullet had evidently hit him in the throat or mouth .
Another was walking sturdily by himself but without his musket , groaning aloud and swinging his arm which had just been hurt , while blood from it was streaming over his greatcoat as from a bottle .
He had that moment been wounded and his face showed fear rather than suffering .
Crossing a road they descended a steep incline and saw several men lying on the ground ; they also met a crowd of soldiers some of whom were unwounded .
The soldiers were ascending the hill breathing heavily , and despite the general 's presence were talking loudly and gesticulating .
In front of them rows of gray cloaks were already visible through the smoke , and an officer catching sight of Bagrati'on rushed shouting after the crowd of retreating soldiers , ordering them back .
Bagrati'on rode up to the ranks along which shots crackled now here and now there , drowning the sound of voices and the shouts of command .
The whole air reeked with smoke .
The excited faces of the soldiers were blackened with it .
A pleasant humming and whistling of bullets were often heard .
" What is this ? "
thought Prince Andrew approaching the crowd of soldiers .
" It ca n't be an attack , for they are not moving ; it ca n't be a square - for they are not drawn up for that . "
He reported that his regiment had been attacked by French cavalry and that , though the attack had been repulsed , he had lost more than half his men .
All he knew was that at the commencement of the action balls and shells began flying all over his regiment and hitting men and that afterwards someone had shouted " Cavalry ! " and our men had begun firing .
They were still firing , not at the cavalry which had disappeared , but at French infantry who had come into the hollow and were firing at our men .
Prince Bagrati'on bowed his head as a sign that this was exactly what he had desired and expected .
Turning to his adjutant he ordered him to bring down the two battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs whom they had just passed .
Prince Andrew was struck by the changed expression on Prince Bagrati'on 's face at this moment .
It expressed the concentrated and happy resolution you see on the face of a man who on a hot day takes a final run before plunging into the water .
The dull , sleepy expression was no longer there , nor the affectation of profound thought .
The round , steady , hawk 's eyes looked before him eagerly and rather disdainfully , not resting on anything although his movements were still slow and measured .
The commander of the regiment turned to Prince Bagrati'on , entreating him to go back as it was too dangerous to remain where they were . "
Please , your excellency , for God 's sake !
" he kept saying , glancing for support at an officer of the suite who turned away from him . "
There , you see ! "
and he drew attention to the bullets whistling , singing , and hissing continually around them .
He spoke as if those bullets could not kill him , and his half - closed eyes gave still more persuasiveness to his words .
The staff officer joined in the colonel 's appeals , but Bagrati'on did not reply ; he only gave an order to cease firing and re - form , so as to give room for the two approaching battalions .
All eyes fastened involuntarily on this French column advancing against them and winding down over the uneven ground .
One could already see the soldiers ' shaggy caps , distinguish the officers from the men , and see the standard flapping against its staff .
" They march splendidly , " remarked someone in Bagrati'on 's suite .
The head of the column had already descended into the hollow .
The clash would take place on this side of it ...
The remains of our regiment which had been in action rapidly formed up and moved to the right ; from behind it , dispersing the laggards , came two battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs in fine order .
Before they had reached Bagrati'on , the weighty tread of the mass of men marching in step could be heard .
On their left flank , nearest to Bagrati'on , marched a company commander , a fine round - faced man , with a stupid and happy expression - the same man who had rushed out of the wattle shed .
At that moment he was clearly thinking of nothing but how dashing a fellow he would appear as he passed the commander .
It was as if all the powers of his soul were concentrated on passing the commander in the best possible manner , and feeling that he was doing it well he was happy . "
Left ... left ... left ... "
A cannon ball , cleaving the air , flew over the heads of Bagrati'on and his suite , and fell into the column to the measure of " Left ... left ! "
" Close up ! " came the company commander 's voice in jaunty tones .
" Well done , lads ! " said Prince Bagrati'on .
" Glad to do our best , your ex'len - lency ! " came a confused shout from the ranks .
A morose soldier marching on the left turned his eyes on Bagrati'on as he shouted , with an expression that seemed to say : " We know that ourselves ! "
Another , without looking round , as though fearing to relax , shouted with his mouth wide open and passed on .
The order was given to halt and down knapsacks .
Bagrati'on rode round the ranks that had marched past him and dismounted .
He gave the reins to a Cossack , took off and handed over his felt coat , stretched his legs , and set his cap straight .
The head of the French column , with its officers leading , appeared from below the hill .
Prince Andrew felt that an invisible power was leading him forward , and experienced great happiness .
The French were already near .
Prince Andrew , walking beside Bagrati'on , could clearly distinguish their bandoliers , red epaulets , and even their faces .
( He distinctly saw an old French officer who , with gaitered legs and turned - out toes , climbed the hill with difficulty . )
Prince Bagrati'on gave no further orders and silently continued to walk on in front of the ranks .
Suddenly one shot after another rang out from the French , smoke appeared all along their uneven ranks , and musket shots sounded .
Several of our men fell , among them the round - faced officer who had marched so gaily and complacently .
But at the moment the first report was heard , Bagrati'on looked round and shouted , " Hurrah ! "
CHAPTER XIX
The attack of the Sixth Chasseurs secured the retreat of our right flank .
In the center T'ushin 's forgotten battery , which had managed to set fire to the Sch"on Grabern village , delayed the French advance .
The French were putting out the fire which the wind was spreading , and thus gave us time to retreat .
The retirement of the center to the other side of the dip in the ground at the rear was hurried and noisy , but the different companies did not get mixed .
But our left - which consisted of the Az'ov and Pod'olsk infantry and the P'avlograd hussars - was simultaneously attacked and outflanked by superior French forces under Lannes and was thrown into confusion .
Bagrati'on had sent Zherk'ov to the general commanding that left flank with orders to retreat immediately .
Zherk'ov , not removing his hand from his cap , turned his horse about and galloped off .
But no sooner had he left Bagrati'on than his courage failed him .
He was seized by panic and could not go where it was dangerous .
The command of the left flank belonged by seniority to the commander of the regiment Kut'uzov had reviewed at Braunau and in which D'olokhov was serving as a private .
But the command of the extreme left flank had been assigned to the commander of the P'avlograd regiment in which Rost'ov was serving , and a misunderstanding arose .
But the regiments , both cavalry and infantry , were by no means ready for the impending action .
From privates to general they were not expecting a battle and were engaged in peaceful occupations , the cavalry feeding the horses and the infantry collecting wood .
"
Bugler , sount ze retreat ! "
But haste was becoming imperative .
The general in command of the infantry went toward his horse with jerky steps , and having mounted drew himself up very straight and tall and rode to the P'avlograd commander .
The commanders met with polite bows but with secret malevolence in their hearts .
" Once again , Colonel , " said the general , " I ca n't leave half my men in the wood .
I beg of you ,
I beg of you , " he repeated , " to occupy the position and prepare for an attack . "
" I peg of you yourself not to mix in vot is not your business ! " suddenly replied the irate colonel .
" If you vere in the cavalry ... "
" I am not in the cavalry , Colonel , but I am a Russian general and if you are not aware of the fact ... "
" Quite avare , your excellency , " suddenly shouted the colonel , touching his horse and turning purple in the face . "
Vill you be so goot to come to ze front and see dat zis position iss no goot ?
I do n't vish to destroy my men for your pleasure ! "
" You forget yourself , Colonel .
I am not considering my own pleasure
and I wo n't allow it to be said ! "
They reached the front , several bullets sped over them , and they halted in silence .
The general and colonel looked sternly and significantly at one another like two fighting cocks preparing for battle , each vainly trying to detect signs of cowardice in the other .
Both passed the examination successfully .
just then they heard the rattle of musketry and a muffled shout almost behind them in the wood .
The French had attacked the men collecting wood in the copse .
It was no longer possible for the hussars to retreat with the infantry .
They were cut off from the line of retreat on the left by the French .
However inconvenient the position , it was now necessary to attack in order to cut a way through for themselves .
The squadron in which Rost'ov was serving had scarcely time to mount before it was halted facing the enemy .
All were conscious of this unseen line , and the question whether they would cross it or not , and how they would cross it , agitated them all .
The colonel rode to the front , angrily gave some reply to questions put to him by the officers , and , like a man desperately insisting on having his own way , gave an order .
No one said anything definite , but the rumor of an attack spread through the squadron .
The command to form up rang out and the sabers whizzed as they were drawn from their scabbards .
Still no one moved .
The troops of the left flank , infantry and hussars alike , felt that the commander did not himself know what to do , and this irresolution communicated itself to the men .
" If only they would be quick ! " thought Rost'ov , feeling that at last the time had come to experience the joy of an attack of which he had so often heard from his fellow hussars .
" Fo'ward , with God , lads ! " rang out Den'isov 's voice . "
At a twot fo'ward ! "
The horses ' croups began to sway in the front line .
Rook pulled at the reins and started of his own accord .
Before him , on the right , Rost'ov saw the front lines of his hussars and still farther ahead a dark line which he could not see distinctly but took to be the enemy .
Shots could be heard , but some way off .
" Faster ! " came the word of command , and Rost'ov felt Rook 's flanks drooping as he broke into a gallop .
Rost'ov anticipated his horse 's movements and became more and more elated .
He had noticed a solitary tree ahead of him .
Oh , how I will slash at him ! "
thought Rost'ov , gripping the hilt of his saber .
" Hur - a - a - a - ah ! " came a roar of voices . "
Let anyone come my way now , " thought Rost'ov driving his spurs into Rook and letting him go at a full gallop so that he outstripped the others .
Ahead , the enemy was already visible .
Suddenly something like a birch broom seemed to sweep over the squadron .
From behind him Bondarch'uk , an hussar he knew , jolted against him and looked angrily at him .
Bondarch'uk 's horse swerved and galloped past .
" How is it I am not moving ?
I have fallen , I am killed ! "
Rost'ov asked and answered at the same instant .
He was alone in the middle of a field .
Instead of the moving horses and hussars ' backs , he saw nothing before him but the motionless earth and the stubble around him .
There was warm blood under his arm . "
No , I am wounded and the horse is killed .
" Rook tried to rise on his forelegs but fell back , pinning his rider 's leg .
Blood was flowing from his head ; he struggled but could not rise .
Rost'ov also tried to rise but fell back , his sabretache having become entangled in the saddle .
Where our men were , and where the French , he did not know .
There was no one near .
Having disentangled his leg , he rose . "
Where , on which side , was now the line that had so sharply divided the two armies ?
" he asked himself and could not answer . "
Can something bad have happened to me ?
" he wondered as he got up : and at that moment he felt that something superfluous was hanging on his benumbed left arm .
The wrist felt as if it were not his .
He examined his hand carefully , vainly trying to find blood on it . "
Ah , here are people coming , " he thought joyfully , seeing some men running toward him .
" They will help me ! "
In front came a man wearing a strange shako and a blue cloak , swarthy , sunburned , and with a hooked nose .
Then came two more , and many more running behind .
One of them said something strange , not in Russian .
In among the hindmost of these men wearing similar shakos was a Russian hussar .
He was being held by the arms and his horse was being led behind him .
" It must be one of ours , a prisoner .
Yes .
Can it be that they will take me too ?
Who are these men ? "
thought Rost'ov , scarcely believing his eyes .
" Can they be French ? "
" Who are they ?
Why are they running ?
Can they be coming at me ?
And why ?
To kill me ?
Me whom everyone is so fond of ? "
He remembered his mother 's love for him , and his family 's , and his friends ' , and the enemy 's intention to kill him seemed impossible . "
But perhaps they may do it ! "
For more than ten seconds he stood not moving from the spot or realizing the situation .
The foremost Frenchman , the one with the hooked nose , was already so close that the expression of his face could be seen .
And the excited , alien face of that man , his bayonet hanging down , holding his breath , and running so lightly , frightened Rost'ov .
He seized his pistol and , instead of firing it , flung it at the Frenchman and ran with all his might toward the bushes .
He did not now run with the feeling of doubt and conflict with which he had trodden the Enns bridge , but with the feeling of a hare fleeing from the hounds .
One single sentiment , that of fear for his young and happy life , possessed his whole being .
Rapidly leaping the furrows , he fled across the field with the impetuosity he used to show at catchplay , now and then turning his good - natured , pale , young face to look back .
A shudder of terror went through him : " No , better not look , " he thought , but having reached the bushes he glanced round once more .
The French had fallen behind , and just as he looked round the first man changed his run to a walk and , turning , shouted something loudly to a comrade farther back .
Rost'ov paused . "
No , there 's some mistake , " thought he .
" They ca n't have wanted to kill me . "
But at the same time , his left arm felt as heavy as if a seventy - pound weight were tied to it .
He could run no more .
The Frenchman also stopped and took aim .
Rost'ov closed his eyes and stooped down .
One bullet and then another whistled past him .
He mustered his last remaining strength , took hold of his left hand with his right , and reached the bushes .
Behind these were some Russian sharpshooters .
CHAPTER XX
The infantry regiments that had been caught unawares in the outskirts of the wood ran out of it , the different companies getting mixed , and retreated as a disorderly crowd .
One soldier , in his fear , uttered the senseless cry , " Cut off ! "
that is so terrible in battle , and that word infected the whole crowd with a feeling of panic .
" Surrounded ! Cut off ?
We 're lost ! " shouted the fugitives .
Having galloped safely through the French , he reached a field behind the copse across which our men , regardless of orders , were running and descending the valley .
That moment of moral hesitation which decides the fate of battles had arrived .
Would this disorderly crowd of soldiers attend to the voice of their commander , or would they , disregarding him , continue their flight ?
The moral hesitation which decided the fate of battles was evidently culminating in a panic .
The general had a fit of coughing as a result of shouting and of the powder smoke and stopped in despair .
Everything seemed lost .
But at that moment the French who were attacking , suddenly and without any apparent reason , ran back and disappeared from the outskirts , and Russian sharpshooters showed themselves in the copse .
It was Tim'okhin 's company , which alone had maintained its order in the wood and , having lain in ambush in a ditch , now attacked the French unexpectedly .
Tim'okhin , armed only with a sword , had rushed at the enemy with such a desperate cry and such mad , drunken determination that , taken by surprise , the French had thrown down their muskets and run .
D'olokhov , running beside Tim'okhin , killed a Frenchman at close quarters and was the first to seize the surrendering French officer by his collar .
Our fugitives returned , the battalions re - formed , and the French who had nearly cut our left flank in half were for the moment repulsed .
Our reserve units were able to join up , and the fight was at an end .
The regimental commander and Major Ekon'omov had stopped beside a bridge , letting the retreating companies pass by them , when a soldier came up and took hold of the commander 's stirrup , almost leaning against him .
The man was wearing a bluish coat of broadcloth , he had no knapsack or cap , his head was bandaged , and over his shoulder a French munition pouch was slung .
He had an officer 's sword in his hand .
The soldier was pale , his blue eyes looked impudently into the commander 's face , and his lips were smiling .
Though the commander was occupied in giving instructions to Major Ekon'omov , he could not help taking notice of the soldier .
" Your excellency , here are two trophies , " said D'olokhov , pointing to the French sword and pouch .
" I have taken an officer prisoner .
I stopped the company . "
D'olokhov breathed heavily from weariness and spoke in abrupt sentences .
" The whole company can bear witness .
I beg you will remember this , your excellency ! "
" All right , all right , " replied the commander , and turned to Major Ekon'omov .
But D'olokhov did not go away ; he untied the handkerchief around his head , pulled it off , and showed the blood congealed on his hair .
" A bayonet wound .
I remained at the front .
Remember , your excellency ! "
On the contrary , the energetic action of that battery led the French to suppose that here - in the center - the main Russian forces were concentrated .
Twice they had attempted to attack this point , but on each occasion had been driven back by grapeshot from the four isolated guns on the hillock .
Soon after Prince Bagrati'on had left him , T'ushin had succeeded in setting fire to Sch"on Grabern .
" Look at them scurrying !
It 's burning !
Just see the smoke !
Fine !
Grand !
Look at the smoke , the smoke ! "
exclaimed the artillerymen , brightening up .
All the guns , without waiting for orders , were being fired in the direction of the conflagration .
As if urging each other on , the soldiers cried at each shot : " Fine !
That 's good !
Look at it ...
Grand ! "
The fire , fanned by the breeze , was rapidly spreading .
Their spirits once roused were , however , not diminished , but only changed character .
The horses were replaced by others from a reserve gun carriage , the wounded were carried away , and the four guns were turned against the ten - gun battery .
Twice they noticed the French appearing below them , and then they fired grapeshot at them .
Little T'ushin , moving feebly and awkwardly , kept telling his orderly to " refill my pipe for that one ! "
and then , scattering sparks from it , ran forward shading his eyes with his small hand to look at the French .
" Smack at 'em , lads !
" he kept saying , seizing the guns by the wheels and working the screws himself .
His face grew more and more animated .
Only when a man was killed or wounded did he frown and turn away from the sight , shouting angrily at the men who , as is always the case , hesitated about lifting the injured or dead .
Owing to the terrible uproar and the necessity for concentration and activity , T'ushin did not experience the slightest unpleasant sense of fear , and the thought that he might be killed or badly wounded never occurred to him .
On the contrary , he became more and more elated .
Though he thought of everything , considered everything , and did everything the best of officers could do in his position , he was in a state akin to feverish delirium or drunkenness .
The enemy 's guns were in his fancy not guns but pipes from which occasional puffs were blown by an invisible smoker .
" There ... he 's puffing again , " muttered T'ushin to himself , as a small cloud rose from the hill and was borne in a streak to the left by the wind .
" Now look out for the ball ... we 'll throw it back . "
" What do you want , your honor ? " asked an artilleryman , standing close by , who heard him muttering .
" Nothing ... only a shell ... " he answered .
" Come along , our Matv'evna ! " he said to himself .
" Matv'evna " * was the name his fancy gave to the farthest gun of the battery , which was large and of an old pattern .
The French swarming round their guns seemed to him like ants .
In that world , the handsome drunkard Number One of the second gun 's crew was " uncle " ; T'ushin looked at him more often than at anyone else and took delight in his every movement .
The sound of musketry at the foot of the hill , now diminishing , now increasing , seemed like someone 's breathing .
He listened intently to the ebb and flow of these sounds .
* Daughter of Matthew .
" Ah ! Breathing again , breathing ! " he muttered to himself .
He imagined himself as an enormously tall , powerful man who was throwing cannon balls at the French with both hands .
" Now then , Matv'evna , dear old lady , do n't let me down ! "
he was saying as he moved from the gun , when a strange , unfamiliar voice called above his head : " Captain T'ushin !
Captain ! "
T'ushin turned round in dismay .
It was the staff officer who had turned him out of the booth at Grunth .
He was shouting in a gasping voice :
" Are you mad ?
You have twice been ordered to retreat , and you ... "
" Why are they down on me ? " thought T'ushin , looking in alarm at his superior .
" I ... do n't ... " he muttered , holding up two fingers to his cap .
" I ... "
But the staff officer did not finish what he wanted to say .
A cannon ball , flying close to him , caused him to duck and bend over his horse .
He paused , and just as he was about to say something more , another ball stopped him .
He turned his horse and galloped off .
" Retire !
All to retire !
" he shouted from a distance .
The soldiers laughed .
A moment later , an adjutant arrived with the same order .
It was Prince Andrew .
The first thing he saw on riding up to the space where T'ushin 's guns were stationed was an unharnessed horse with a broken leg , that lay screaming piteously beside the harnessed horses .
Blood was gushing from its leg as from a spring .
Among the limbers lay several dead men .
One ball after another passed over as he approached and he felt a nervous shudder run down his spine .
But the mere thought of being afraid roused him again .
" I can not be afraid , " thought he , and dismounted slowly among the guns .
He delivered the order and did not leave the battery .
He decided to have the guns removed from their positions and withdrawn in his presence .
Together with T'ushin , stepping across the bodies and under a terrible fire from the French , he attended to the removal of the guns .
" A staff officer was here a minute ago , but skipped off , " said an artilleryman to Prince Andrew .
" Not like your honor ! "
Prince Andrew said nothing to T'ushin .
They were both so busy as to seem not to notice one another .
" Well , till we meet again ... " he said , holding out his hand to T'ushin .
" Good - by , my dear fellow , " said T'ushin . "
Dear soul !
Good - by , my dear fellow ! "
and for some unknown reason tears suddenly filled his eyes .
CHAPTER XXI
The wind had fallen and black clouds , merging with the powder smoke , hung low over the field of battle on the horizon .
It was growing dark and the glow of two conflagrations was the more conspicuous .
The cannonade was dying down , but the rattle of musketry behind and on the right sounded oftener and nearer .
Interrupting one another , they all gave , and transmitted , orders as to how to proceed , reprimanding and reproaching him .
T'ushin gave no orders , and , silently - fearing to speak because at every word he felt ready to weep without knowing why - rode behind on his artillery nag .
Though the orders were to abandon the wounded , many of them dragged themselves after troops and begged for seats on the gun carriages .
The jaunty infantry officer who just before the battle had rushed out of T'ushin 's wattle shed was laid , with a bullet in his stomach , on " Matv'evna 's " carriage .
At the foot of the hill , a pale hussar cadet , supporting one hand with the other , came up to T'ushin and asked for a seat .
" Captain , for God 's sake !
I 've hurt my arm , " he said timidly .
" For God 's sake ... I ca n't walk .
For God 's sake ! "
It was plain that this cadet had already repeatedly asked for a lift and been refused .
He asked in a hesitating , piteous voice .
" Tell them to give me a seat , for God 's sake ! "
" Give him a seat , " said T'ushin . "
Lay a cloak for him to sit on , lad , " he said , addressing his favorite soldier . "
And where is the wounded officer ? "
" He has been set down .
He died , " replied someone .
" Help him up .
Sit down , dear fellow , sit down !
Spread out the cloak , Ant'onov . "
The cadet was Rost'ov .
With one hand he supported the other ; he was pale and his jaw trembled , shivering feverishly .
He was placed on " Matv'evna , " the gun from which they had removed the dead officer .
The cloak they spread under him was wet with blood which stained his breeches and arm .
" What , are you wounded , my lad ? " said T'ushin , approaching the gun on which Rost'ov sat .
" No , it 's a sprain . "
" Then what is this blood on the gun carriage ? " inquired T'ushin .
" It was the officer , your honor , stained it , " answered the artilleryman , wiping away the blood with his coat sleeve , as if apologizing for the state of his gun .
It was all that they could do to get the guns up the rise aided by the infantry , and having reached the village of Gruntersdorf they halted .
It had grown so dark that one could not distinguish the uniforms ten paces off , and the firing had begun to subside .
Suddenly , near by on the right , shouting and firing were again heard .
Flashes of shot gleamed in the darkness .
This was the last French attack and was met by soldiers who had sheltered in the village houses .
They all rushed out of the village again , but T'ushin 's guns could not move , and the artillerymen , T'ushin , and the cadet exchanged silent glances as they awaited their fate .
The firing died down and soldiers , talking eagerly , streamed out of a side street .
" Not hurt , Petr'ov ? " asked one .
" We 've given it 'em hot , mate !
They wo n't make another push now , " said another .
" You could n't see a thing .
How they shot at their own fellows !
Nothing could be seen .
Pitch - dark , brother !
Is n't there something to drink ? "
The French had been repulsed for the last time .
And again and again in the complete darkness T'ushin 's guns moved forward , surrounded by the humming infantry as by a frame .
In the darkness , it seemed as though a gloomy unseen river was flowing always in one direction , humming with whispers and talk and the sound of hoofs and wheels .
Amid the general rumble , the groans and voices of the wounded were more distinctly heard than any other sound in the darkness of the night .
The gloom that enveloped the army was filled with their groans , which seemed to melt into one with the darkness of the night .
After a while the moving mass became agitated , someone rode past on a white horse followed by his suite , and said something in passing : " What did he say ?
Where to , now ?
Halt , is it ?
Did he thank us ? "
came eager questions from all sides .
The whole moving mass began pressing closer together and a report spread that they were ordered to halt : evidently those in front had halted .
All remained where they were in the middle of the muddy road .
Fires were lighted and the talk became more audible .
Captain T'ushin , having given orders to his company , sent a soldier to find a dressing station or a doctor for the cadet , and sat down by a bonfire the soldiers had kindled on the road .
Rost'ov , too , dragged himself to the fire .
From pain , cold , and damp , a feverish shivering shook his whole body .
Drowsiness was irresistibly mastering him , but he kept awake by an excruciating pain in his arm , for which he could find no satisfactory position .
T'ushin 's large , kind , intelligent eyes were fixed with sympathy and commiseration on Rost'ov , who saw that T'ushin with his whole heart wished to help him but could not .
From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry , who were walking , driving past , and settling down all around .
The sound of voices , the tramping feet , the horses ' hoofs moving in mud , the crackling of wood fires near and afar , merged into one tremulous rumble .
It was no longer , as before , a dark , unseen river flowing through the gloom , but a dark sea swelling and gradually subsiding after a storm .
Rost'ov looked at and listened listlessly to what passed before and around him .
An infantryman came to the fire , squatted on his heels , held his hands to the blaze , and turned away his face .
" You do n't mind your honor ? " he asked T'ushin .
" I 've lost my company , your honor .
I do n't know where ... such bad luck ! "
With the soldier , an infantry officer with a bandaged cheek came up to the bonfire , and addressing T'ushin asked him to have the guns moved a trifle to let a wagon go past .
After he had gone , two soldiers rushed to the campfire .
They were quarreling and fighting desperately , each trying to snatch from the other a boot they were both holding on to .
" You picked it up ? ...
I dare say !
You 're very smart ! "
one of them shouted hoarsely .
Then a thin , pale soldier , his neck bandaged with a bloodstained leg band , came up and in angry tones asked the artillerymen for water .
" Must one die like a dog ? " said he .
T'ushin told them to give the man some water .
Then a cheerful soldier ran up , begging a little fire for the infantry .
" A nice little hot torch for the infantry !
Good luck to you , fellow countrymen .
Thanks for the fire - we'll return it with interest , " said he , carrying away into the darkness a glowing stick .
Next came four soldiers , carrying something heavy on a cloak , and passed by the fire .
One of them stumbled .
" Who the devil has put the logs on the road ? " snarled he .
" He 's dead - why carry him ? " said another .
" Shut up ! "
And they disappeared into the darkness with their load .
" Still aching ? "
T'ushin asked Rost'ov in a whisper .
" Yes . "
" Your honor , you 're wanted by the general .
He is in the hut here , " said a gunner , coming up to T'ushin .
" Coming , friend . "
T'ushin rose and , buttoning his greatcoat and pulling it straight , walked away from the fire .
Not far from the artillery campfire , in a hut that had been prepared for him , Prince Bagrati'on sat at dinner , talking with some commanding officers who had gathered at his quarters .
In the next hut there was a French colonel who had been taken prisoner by our dragoons .
Our officers were flocking in to look at him .
Prince Bagrati'on was thanking the individual commanders and inquiring into details of the action and our losses .
that 's what I did . "
The general had so wished to do this and was so sorry he had not managed to do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened .
Perhaps it might really have been so ?
Could one possibly make out amid all that confusion what did or did not happen ?
" I saw the P'avlograd hussars attack there , your excellency , " chimed in Zherk'ov , looking uneasily around .
He had not seen the hussars all that day , but had heard about them from an infantry officer .
" They broke up two squares , your excellency . "
Prince Bagrati'on turned to the old colonel :
" Gentlemen , I thank you all ; all arms have behaved heroically : infantry , cavalry , and artillery .
How was it that two guns were abandoned in the center ? "
he inquired , searching with his eyes for someone .
( Prince Bagrati'on did not ask about the guns on the left flank ; he knew that all the guns there had been abandoned at the very beginning of the action . )
" I think I sent you ? "
he added , turning to the staff officer on duty .
" One was damaged , " answered the staff officer , " and the other I ca n't understand .
I was there all the time giving orders and had only just left ....
It is true that it was hot there , " he added , modestly .
Someone mentioned that Captain T'ushin was bivouacking close to the village and had already been sent for .
" Oh , but you were there ? " said Prince Bagrati'on , addressing Prince Andrew .
" Of course , we only just missed one another , " said the staff officer , with a smile to Bolk'onski .
" I had not the pleasure of seeing you , " said Prince Andrew , coldly and abruptly .
All were silent .
T'ushin appeared at the threshold and made his way timidly from behind the backs of the generals .
As he stepped past the generals in the crowded hut , feeling embarrassed as he always was by the sight of his superiors , he did not notice the staff of the banner and stumbled over it .
Several of those present laughed .
" How was it a gun was abandoned ? " asked Bagrati'on , frowning , not so much at the captain as at those who were laughing , among whom Zherk'ov laughed loudest .
Only now , when he was confronted by the stern authorities , did his guilt and the disgrace of having lost two guns and yet remaining alive present themselves to T'ushin in all their horror .
He had been so excited that he had not thought about it until that moment .
The officers ' laughter confused him still more .
He stood before Bagrati'on with his lower jaw trembling and was hardly able to mutter :
" I do n't know ...
your excellency ...
I had no men ... your excellency . "
" You might have taken some from the covering troops . "
T'ushin did not say that there were no covering troops , though that was perfectly true .
He was afraid of getting some other officer into trouble , and silently fixed his eyes on Bagrati'on as a schoolboy who has blundered looks at an examiner .
The silence lasted some time .
Prince Bagrati'on , apparently not wishing to be severe , found nothing to say ; the others did not venture to intervene .
Prince Andrew looked at T'ushin from under his brows and his fingers twitched nervously .
" Your excellency ! "
Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abrupt voice , " you were pleased to send me to Captain T'ushin 's battery .
I went there and found two thirds of the men and horses knocked out , two guns smashed , and no supports at all . "
Prince Bagrati'on and T'ushin looked with equal intentness at Bolk'onski , who spoke with suppressed agitation .
Prince Bagrati'on looked at T'ushin , evidently reluctant to show distrust in Bolk'onski 's emphatic opinion yet not feeling able fully to credit it , bent his head , and told T'ushin that he could go .
Prince Andrew went out with him .
" Thank you ; you saved me , my dear fellow ! " said T'ushin .
Prince Andrew gave him a look , but said nothing and went away .
He felt sad and depressed .
It was all so strange , so unlike what he had hoped .
" Who are they ?
Why are they here ?
What do they want ?
And when will all this end ? " thought Rost'ov , looking at the changing shadows before him .
The pain in his arm became more and more intense .
Irresistible drowsiness overpowered him , red rings danced before his eyes , and the impression of those voices and faces and a sense of loneliness merged with the physical pain .
It was they , these soldiers - wounded and unwounded - it was they who were crushing , weighing down , and twisting the sinews and scorching the flesh of his sprained arm and shoulder .
To rid himself of them he closed his eyes .
He tried to get away from them , but they would not for an instant let his shoulder move a hair 's breadth .
It would not ache - it would be well - if only they did not pull it , but it was impossible to get rid of them .
He opened his eyes and looked up .
The black canopy of night hung less than a yard above the glow of the charcoal .
Flakes of falling snow were fluttering in that light .
T'ushin had not returned , the doctor had not come .
He was alone now , except for a soldier who was sitting naked at the other side of the fire , warming his thin yellow body .
" Nobody wants me ! " thought Rost'ov .
" There is no one to help me or pity me .
Yet I was once at home , strong , happy , and loved . "
He sighed and , doing so , groaned involuntarily .
Rost'ov did not listen to the soldier .
And why did I come here ?
" he wondered .
Next day the French army did not renew their attack , and the remnant of Bagrati'on 's detachment was reunited to Kut'uzov 's army .
BOOK THREE : 1805
CHAPTER I
Prince Vas'ili was not a man who deliberately thought out his plans .
Still less did he think of injuring anyone for his own advantage .
He was merely a man of the world who had got on and to whom getting on had become a habit .
Schemes and devices for which he never rightly accounted to himself , but which formed the whole interest of his life , were constantly shaping themselves in his mind , arising from the circumstances and persons he met .
Of these plans he had not merely one or two in his head but dozens , some only beginning to form themselves , some approaching achievement , and some in course of disintegration .
He did not , for instance , say to himself : " This man now has influence , I must gain his confidence and friendship and through him obtain a special grant . "
Nor did he say to himself : " Pierre is a rich man , I must entice him to marry my daughter and lend me the forty thousand rubles I need . "
With apparent absent - mindedness , yet with unhesitating assurance that he was doing the right thing , Prince Vas'ili did everything to get Pierre to marry his daughter .
Had he thought out his plans beforehand he could not have been so natural and shown such unaffected familiarity in intercourse with everybody both above and below him in social standing .
Something always drew him toward those richer and more powerful than himself and he had rare skill in seizing the most opportune moment for making use of people .
Pierre , on unexpectedly becoming Count Bez'ukhov and a rich man , felt himself after his recent loneliness and freedom from cares so beset and preoccupied that only in bed was he able to be by himself .
These different people - businessmen , relations , and acquaintances alike - were all disposed to treat the young heir in the most friendly and flattering manner : they were all evidently firmly convinced of Pierre 's noble qualities .
Even people who had formerly been spiteful toward him and evidently unfriendly now became gentle and affectionate .
The angry eldest princess , with the long waist and hair plastered down like a doll 's , had come into Pierre 's room after the funeral .
She could not refrain from weeping at these words .
Touched that this statuesque princess could so change , Pierre took her hand and begged her forgiveness , without knowing what for .
From that day the eldest princess quite changed toward Pierre and began knitting a striped scarf for him .
Pierre signed the deed and after that the princess grew still kinder .
The younger sisters also became affectionate to him , especially the youngest , the pretty one with the mole , who often made him feel confused by her smiles and her own confusion when meeting him .
It seemed so natural to Pierre that everyone should like him , and it would have seemed so unnatural had anyone disliked him , that he could not but believe in the sincerity of those around him .
Besides , he had no time to ask himself whether these people were sincere or not .
He was always busy and always felt in a state of mild and cheerful intoxication .
More than anyone else , Prince Vas'ili took possession of Pierre 's affairs and of Pierre himself in those early days .
From the death of Count Bez'ukhov he did not let go his hold of the lad .
" We start tomorrow and I 'm giving you a place in my carriage .
I am very glad .
All our important business here is now settled , and I ought to have been off long ago .
Here is something I have received from the chancellor .
I asked him for you , and you have been entered in the diplomatic corps and made a Gentleman of the Bedchamber .
The diplomatic career now lies open before you . "
Notwithstanding the tone of wearied assurance with which these words were pronounced , Pierre , who had so long been considering his career , wished to make some suggestion .
But Prince Vas'ili interrupted him in the special deep cooing tone , precluding the possibility of interrupting his speech , which he used in extreme cases when special persuasion was needed .
" Mais , mon cher , I did this for my own sake , to satisfy my conscience , and there is nothing to thank me for .
No one has ever complained yet of being too much loved ; and besides , you are free , you could throw it up tomorrow .
But you will see everything for yourself when you get to Petersburg .
It is high time for you to get away from these terrible recollections . "
Prince Vas'ili sighed . "
Yes , yes , my boy .
And my valet can go in your carriage .
Ah !
I was nearly forgetting , " he added .
" You know , mon cher , your father and I
had some accounts to settle , so I have received what was due from the Ryaz'an estate and will keep it ; you wo n't require it .
We 'll go into the accounts later . "
By " what was due from the Ryaz'an estate " Prince Vas'ili meant several thousand rubles quitrent received from Pierre 's peasants , which the prince had retained for himself .
In Petersburg , as in Moscow , Pierre found the same atmosphere of gentleness and affection .
Of his former bachelor acquaintances many were no longer in Petersburg .
His whole time was taken up with dinners and balls and was spent chiefly at Prince Vas'ili 's house in the company of the stout princess , his wife , and his beautiful daughter H'el`ene .
Like the others , Anna P'avlovna Sch'erer showed Pierre the change of attitude toward him that had taken place in society .
Now everything Pierre said was charmant .
Even if Anna P'avlovna did not say so , he could see that she wished to and only refrained out of regard for his modesty .
Pierre felt flattered by this .
Anna P'avlovna arranged the different groups in her drawing room with her habitual skill .
The large group , in which were Prince Vas'ili and the generals , had the benefit of the diplomat .
Another group was at the tea table .
" Wait a bit , I have something in view for you this evening . "
( She glanced at H'el`ene and smiled at her . )
" My dear H'el`ene , be charitable to my poor aunt who adores you .
Go and keep her company for ten minutes .
And that it will not be too dull , here is the dear count who will not refuse to accompany you . "
The beauty went to the aunt , but Anna P'avlovna detained Pierre , looking as if she had to give some final necessary instructions .
" Is n't she exquisite ?
" she said to Pierre , pointing to the stately beauty as she glided away . "
And how she carries herself !
For so young a girl , such tact , such masterly perfection of manner !
It comes from her heart .
Happy the man who wins her !
With her the least worldly of men would occupy a most brilliant position in society .
Do n't you think so ?
I only wanted to know your opinion , " and Anna P'avlovna let Pierre go .
Pierre , in reply , sincerely agreed with her as to H'el`ene 's perfection of manner .
If he ever thought of H'el`ene , it was just of her beauty and her remarkable skill in appearing silently dignified in society .
The old aunt received the two young people in her corner , but seemed desirous of hiding her adoration for H'el`ene and inclined rather to show her fear of Anna P'avlovna .
She looked at her niece , as if inquiring what she was to do with these people .
On leaving them , Anna P'avlovna again touched Pierre 's sleeve , saying : " I hope you wo n't say that it is dull in my house again , " and she glanced at H'el`ene .
H'el`ene smiled , with a look implying that she did not admit the possibility of anyone seeing her without being enchanted .
The aunt coughed , swallowed , and said in French that she was very pleased to see H'el`ene , then she turned to Pierre with the same words of welcome and the same look .
In the middle of a dull and halting conversation , H'el`ene turned to Pierre with the beautiful bright smile that she gave to everyone .
Pierre was so used to that smile , and it had so little meaning for him , that he paid no attention to it .
The aunt was just speaking of a collection of snuffboxes that had belonged to Pierre 's father , Count Bez'ukhov , and showed them her own box .
Princess H'el`ene asked to see the portrait of the aunt 's husband on the box lid .
He half rose , meaning to go round , but the aunt handed him the snuffbox , passing it across H'el`ene 's back .
H'el`ene stooped forward to make room , and looked round with a smile .
She was , as always at evening parties , wearing a dress such as was then fashionable , cut very low at front and back .
He was conscious of the warmth of her body , the scent of perfume , and the creaking of her corset as she moved .
He did not see her marble beauty forming a complete whole with her dress , but all the charm of her body only covered by her garments .
And having once seen this he could not help being aware of it , just as we can not renew an illusion we have once seen through .
" So you have never noticed before how beautiful I am ? "
H'el`ene seemed to say .
" You had not noticed that I am a woman ?
Yes , I am a woman who may belong to anyone - to you too , " said her glance .
And at that moment Pierre felt that H'el`ene not only could , but must , be his wife , and that it could not be otherwise .
He knew this at that moment as surely as if he had been standing at the altar with her .
How and when this would be he did not know
, he did not even know if it would be a good thing ( he even felt , he knew not why , that it would be a bad thing ) , but he knew it would happen .
She was terribly close to him .
She already had power over him , and between them there was no longer any barrier except the barrier of his own will .
" Well , I will leave you in your little corner , " came Anna P'avlovna 's voice , " I see you are all right there . "
And Pierre , anxiously trying to remember whether he had done anything reprehensible , looked round with a blush .
It seemed to him that everyone knew what had happened to him as he knew it himself .
A little later when he went up to the large circle , Anna P'avlovna said to him : " I hear you are refitting your Petersburg house ? "
This was true .
The architect had told him that it was necessary , and Pierre , without knowing why , was having his enormous Petersburg house done up .
" That 's a good thing , but do n't move from Prince Vas'ili 's .
It is good to have a friend like the prince , " she said , smiling at Prince Vas'ili .
" I know something about that .
Do n't I ?
And you are still so young .
You need advice .
Do n't be angry with me for exercising an old woman 's privilege . "
She paused , as women always do , expecting something after they have mentioned their age . "
If you marry it will be a different thing , " she continued , uniting them both in one glance .
Pierre did not look at H'el`ene nor she at him .
But she was just as terribly close to him .
He muttered something and colored .
When he got home he could not sleep for a long time for thinking of what had happened .
What had happened ?
Nothing .
" But she 's stupid .
I have myself said she is stupid , " he thought .
" There is something nasty , something wrong , in the feeling she excites in me .
I have been told that her brother Anatole was in love with her and
she with him , that there was quite a scandal and that that 's why he was sent away .
Hippolyte is her brother ...
Prince Vas'ili is her father ...
It 's bad ....
And he again saw her not as the daughter of Prince Vas'ili , but visualized her whole body only veiled by its gray dress . "
But no !
Why did this thought never occur to me before ? "
and again he told himself that it was impossible , that there would be something unnatural , and as it seemed to him dishonorable , in this marriage .
He recalled her former words and looks and the words and looks of those who had seen them together .
But at the very time he was expressing this conviction to himself , in another part of his mind her image rose in all its womanly beauty .
CHAPTER II
In November , 1805 , Prince Vas'ili had to go on a tour of inspection in four different provinces .
"
Youth , frivolity ...
well , God be with him , " thought he , relishing his own goodness of heart , " but it must be brought to a head .
The day after tomorrow will be L"elya 's name day .
I will invite two or three people , and if he does not understand what he ought to do then it will be my affair -
yes , my affair .
I am her father . "
And though Prince Vas'ili , when he stayed in ( as he said ) for Pierre 's sake , hardly exchanged a couple of words with him , Pierre felt unable to disappoint him .
Every day he said to himself one and the same thing : " It is time I understood her and made up my mind what she really is .
Was I mistaken before , or am I mistaken now ?
No , she is not stupid , she is an excellent girl , " he sometimes said to himself " she never makes a mistake , never says anything stupid .
She says little , but what she does say is always clear and simple , so she is not stupid .
She never was abashed and is not abashed now , so she can not be a bad woman ! "
She was right in regarding all arguments as nonsense in comparison with that smile .
She always addressed him with a radiantly confiding smile meant for him alone , in which there was something more significant than in the general smile that usually brightened her face .
A thousand times during that month and a half while he felt himself drawn nearer and nearer to that dreadful abyss , Pierre said to himself : " What am I doing ?
I need resolution .
Can it be that I have none ? "
He wished to take a decision , but felt with dismay that in this matter he lacked that strength of will which he had known in himself and really possessed .
On H'el`ene 's name day , a small party of just their own people - as his wife said - met for supper at Prince Vas'ili 's .
All these friends and relations had been given to understand that the fate of the young girl would be decided that evening .
The visitors were seated at supper .
Princess Kur'agina , a portly imposing woman who had once been handsome , was sitting at the head of the table .
On either side of her sat the more important guests - an old general and his wife , and Anna P'avlovna Sch'erer .
At the other end sat the younger and less important guests , and there too sat the members of the family , and Pierre and H'el`ene , side by side .
Prince Vas'ili was not having any supper : he went round the table in a merry mood , sitting down now by one , now by another , of the guests .
To each of them he made some careless and agreeable remark except to Pierre and H'el`ene , whose presence he seemed not to notice .
He enlivened the whole party .
At the center of the table , Prince Vas'ili attracted everybody 's attention .
This rescript began with the words : " Serg'ey Kuzm'ich , From all sides reports reach me , " etc .
" Well , and so he never got farther than : ' Serg'ey Kuzm'ich ' ? " asked one of the ladies .
" Exactly , not a hair 's breadth farther , " answered Prince Vas'ili , laughing , " ' Serg'ey Kuzm'ich ...
From all sides ...
From all sides ...
Serg'ey Kuzm'ich ... '
Poor Vyazm'itinov could not get any farther !
And again his handkerchief , and again : ' Serg'ey Kuzm'ich , From all sides , ' ... and tears , till at last somebody else was asked to read it . "
" Kuzm'ich ...
From all sides ... and then tears , " someone repeated laughing .
" Do n't be unkind , " cried Anna P'avlovna from her end of the table holding up a threatening finger . "
He is such a worthy and excellent man , our dear Vyazm'itinov .... "
Everybody laughed a great deal .
At the head of the table , where the honored guests sat , everyone seemed to be in high spirits and under the influence of a variety of exciting sensations .
" And what nonsense all this is that I am saying ! "
thought a diplomatist , glancing at the happy faces of the lovers .
" That 's happiness ! "
Into the insignificant , trifling , and artificial interests uniting that society had entered the simple feeling of the attraction of a healthy and handsome young man and woman for one another .
And this human feeling dominated everything else and soared above all their affected chatter .
Jests fell flat , news was not interesting , and the animation was evidently forced .
It seemed as if the very light of the candles was focused on those two happy faces alone .
Pierre felt that he was the center of it all , and this both pleased and embarrassed him .
He was like a man entirely absorbed in some occupation .
He did not see , hear , or understand anything clearly .
Only now and then detached ideas and impressions from the world of reality shot unexpectedly through his mind .
" So it is all finished ! " he thought . "
And how has it all happened ?
How quickly !
Now I know that not because of her alone , nor of myself alone , but because of everyone , it must inevitably come about .
They are all expecting it , they are so sure that it will happen that I can not , I can not , disappoint them .
But how will it be ?
I do not know , but it will certainly happen ! "
thought Pierre , glancing at those dazzling shoulders close to his eyes .
Or he would suddenly feel ashamed of he knew not what .
He felt it awkward to attract everyone 's attention and to be considered a lucky man and , with his plain face , to be looked on as a sort of Paris possessed of a Helen . "
But no doubt it always is and must be so ! "
he consoled himself . "
And besides , what have I done to bring it about ?
How did it begin ?
I traveled from Moscow with Prince Vas'ili .
Then there was nothing .
So why should I not stay at his house ?
Then I played cards with her and picked up her reticule and drove out with her .
How did it begin , when did it all come about ? "
And here he was sitting by her side as her betrothed , seeing , hearing , feeling her nearness , her breathing , her movements , her beauty .
Then it would suddenly seem to him that it was not she
Suddenly he heard a familiar voice repeating something to him a second time .
But Pierre was so absorbed that he did not understand what was said .
" I am asking you when you last heard from Bolk'onski , " repeated Prince Vas'ili a third time .
" How absent - minded you are , my dear fellow . "
Prince Vas'ili smiled , and Pierre noticed that everyone was smiling at him and H'el`ene . "
Well , what of it , if you all know it ? " thought Pierre .
" What of it ?
It 's the truth ! "
and he himself smiled his gentle childlike smile , and H'el`ene smiled too .
" When did you get the letter ?
Was it from Olm"utz ? " repeated Prince Vas'ili , who pretended to want to know this in order to settle a dispute .
" How can one talk or think of such trifles ? " thought Pierre .
" Yes , from Olm"utz , " he answered , with a sigh .
After supper Pierre with his partner followed the others into the drawing room .
The guests began to disperse , some without taking leave of H'el`ene .
Some , as if unwilling to distract her from an important occupation , came up to her for a moment and made haste to go away , refusing to let her see them off .
The diplomatist preserved a mournful silence as he left the drawing room .
He pictured the vanity of his diplomatic career in comparison with Pierre 's happiness .
The old general grumbled at his wife when she asked how his leg was . "
Oh , the old fool , " he thought .
" That Princess H'el`ene will be beautiful still when she 's fifty . "
" I think I may congratulate you , " whispered Anna P'avlovna to the old princess , kissing her soundly .
" If I had n't this headache I 'd have stayed longer . "
The old princess did not reply , she was tormented by jealousy of her daughter 's happiness .
While the guests were taking their leave Pierre remained for a long time alone with H'el`ene in the little drawing room where they were sitting .
He had often before , during the last six weeks , remained alone with her , but had never spoken to her of love .
Now he felt that it was inevitable , but he could not make up his mind to take the final step .
He felt ashamed ; he felt that he was occupying someone else 's place here beside H'el`ene .
" This happiness is not for you , " some inner voice whispered to him . "
This happiness is for those who have not in them what there is in you . "
But , as he had to say something , he began by asking her whether she was satisfied with the party .
She replied in her usual simple manner that this name day of hers had been one of the pleasantest she had ever had .
Some of the nearest relatives had not yet left .
They were sitting in the large drawing room .
Prince Vas'ili came up to Pierre with languid footsteps .
Pierre rose and said it was getting late .
Prince Vas'ili gave him a look of stern inquiry , as though what Pierre had just said was so strange that one could not take it in .
But then the expression of severity changed , and he drew Pierre 's hand downwards , made him sit down , and smiled affectionately .
" Well , L"elya ? "
And he again turned to Pierre .
" Serg'ey Kuzm'ich - From all sides- " he said , unbuttoning the top button of his waistcoat .
Pierre smiled , but his smile showed that he knew it was not the story about Serg'ey Kuzm'ich that interested Prince Vas'ili just then , and Prince Vas'ili saw that Pierre knew this .
He suddenly muttered something and went away .
It seemed to Pierre that even the prince was disconcerted .
H'el`ene answered with a smile that she too had missed it .
When Prince Vas'ili returned to the drawing room , the princess , his wife , was talking in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre .
" Of course , it is a very brilliant match , but happiness , my dear ... "
" Marriages are made in heaven , " replied the elderly lady .
Prince Vas'ili passed by , seeming not to hear the ladies , and sat down on a sofa in a far corner of the room .
He closed his eyes and seemed to be dozing .
His head sank forward and then he roused himself .
" Aline , " he said to his wife , " go and see what they are about . "
The princess went up to the door , passed by it with a dignified and indifferent air , and glanced into the little drawing room .
Pierre and H'el`ene still sat talking just as before .
" Still the same , " she said to her husband .
Prince Vas'ili frowned , twisting his mouth , his cheeks quivered and his face assumed the coarse , unpleasant expression peculiar to him .
Shaking himself , he rose , threw back his head , and with resolute steps went past the ladies into the little drawing room .
With quick steps he went joyfully up to Pierre .
His face was so unusually triumphant that Pierre rose in alarm on seeing it .
" Thank God ! " said Prince Vas'ili .
" My wife has told me everything ! "
( He put one arm around Pierre and the other around his daughter.)-"My dear boy ...
L"elya ...
I am very pleased . "
( His voice trembled . )
" I loved your father ... and she will make you a good wife ...
God bless you ! ... "
He embraced his daughter , and then again Pierre , and kissed him with his malodorous mouth .
Tears actually moistened his cheeks .
" Princess , come here ! " he shouted .
The old princess came in and also wept .
The elderly lady was using her handkerchief too .
Pierre was kissed , and he kissed the beautiful H'el`ene 's hand several times .
After a while they were left alone again .
" All this had to be and could not be otherwise , " thought Pierre , " so it is useless to ask whether it is good or bad .
It is good because it 's definite and one is rid of the old tormenting doubt . "
Pierre held the hand of his betrothed in silence , looking at her beautiful bosom as it rose and fell .
" H'el`ene ! " he said aloud and paused .
" Something special is always said in such cases , " he thought , but could not remember what it was that people say .
He looked at her face .
She drew nearer to him .
Her face flushed .
" Oh , take those off ... those ... " she said , pointing to his spectacles .
Pierre took them off , and his eyes , besides the strange look eyes have from which spectacles have just been removed , had also a frightened and inquiring look .
He was about to stoop over her hand and kiss it , but with a rapid , almost brutal movement of her head , she intercepted his lips and met them with her own .
Her face struck Pierre , by its altered , unpleasantly excited expression .
" It is too late now , it 's done ; besides I love her , " thought Pierre .
" Je vous aime ! "
* he said , remembering what has to be said at such moments : but his words sounded so weak that he felt ashamed of himself .
* " I love you . "
CHAPTER III
Old Prince Nicholas Bolk'onski received a letter from Prince Vas'ili in November , 1805 , announcing that he and his son would be paying him a visit .
" My son Anatole is accompanying me on his way to the army , so I hope you will allow him personally to express the deep respect that , emulating his father , he feels for you . "
" It seems that there will be no need to bring Mary out , suitors are coming to us of their own accord , " incautiously remarked the little princess on hearing the news .
Prince Nicholas frowned , but said nothing .
A fortnight after the letter Prince Vas'ili 's servants came one evening in advance of him , and he and his son arrived next day .
Old Bolk'onski had always had a poor opinion of Prince Vas'ili 's character , but more so recently , since in the new reigns of Paul and Alexander Prince Vas'ili had risen to high position and honors .
And now , from the hints contained in his letter and given by the little princess , he saw which way the wind was blowing , and his low opinion changed into a feeling of contemptuous ill will .
He snorted whenever he mentioned him .
On the day of Prince Vas'ili 's arrival , Prince Bolk'onski was particularly discontented and out of temper .
" Do you hear how he 's walking ? " said T'ikhon , drawing the architect 's attention to the sound of the prince 's footsteps .
" Stepping flat on his heels - we know what that means .... "
However , at nine o'clock the prince , in his velvet coat with a sable collar and cap , went out for his usual walk .
The prince went through the conservatories , the serfs ' quarters , and the outbuildings , frowning and silent .
" Can a sleigh pass ? " he asked his overseer , a venerable man , resembling his master in manners and looks , who was accompanying him back to the house .
" The snow is deep .
I am having the avenue swept , your honor . "
The prince bowed his head and went up to the porch .
" God be thanked , " thought the overseer , " the storm has blown over ! "
" It would have been hard to drive up , your honor , " he added .
" I heard , your honor , that a minister is coming to visit your honor . "
The prince turned round to the overseer and fixed his eyes on him , frowning .
" What ?
A minister ?
What minister ?
Who gave orders ? "
he said in his shrill , harsh voice . "
The road is not swept for the princess my daughter , but for a minister !
For me , there are no ministers ! "
" Your honor , I thought ... "
" You thought ! " shouted the prince , his words coming more and more rapidly and indistinctly .
" You thought ! ...
Rascals !
Blackguards ! ...
I 'll teach you to think ! " and lifting his stick he swung it and would have hit Alp'atych , the overseer , had not the latter instinctively avoided the blow . "
Thought ... Blackguards ... " shouted the prince rapidly .
Throw the snow back on the road ! "
did not lift his stick again but hurried into the house .
What she found hardest to bear was to know that on such occasions she ought to behave like Mademoiselle Bourienne , but could not .
The prince looked at his daughter 's frightened face and snorted .
" Fool ... or dummy ! " he muttered .
" And the other one is not here .
They 've been telling tales , " he thought - referring to the little princess who was not in the dining room .
" Where is the princess ? " he asked .
" Hiding ? "
" She is not very well , " answered Mademoiselle Bourienne with a bright smile , " so she wo n't come down .
It is natural in her state . "
" Hm ! Hm ! " muttered the prince , sitting down .
His plate seemed to him not quite clean , and pointing to a spot he flung it away .
T'ikhon caught it and handed it to a footman .
The little princess was not unwell , but had such an overpowering fear of the prince that , hearing he was in a bad humor , she had decided not to appear .
" I am afraid for the baby , " she said to Mademoiselle Bourienne : " Heaven knows what a fright might do . "
In general at Bald Hills the little princess lived in constant fear , and with a sense of antipathy to the old prince which she did not realize because the fear was so much the stronger feeling .
The prince reciprocated this antipathy , but it was overpowered by his contempt for her .
" So we are to have visitors , mon prince ? " remarked Mademoiselle Bourienne , unfolding her white napkin with her rosy fingers . "
His Excellency Prince Vas'ili Kur'agin and his son , I understand ?
" she said inquiringly .
" Hm!-his excellency is a puppy .... I got him his appointment in the service , " said the prince disdainfully .
" Why his son is coming I do n't understand .
Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know .
I do n't want him . "
( He looked at his blushing daughter . )
" Are you unwell today ?
Eh ?
Afraid of the ' minister ' as that idiot
Alp'atych called him this morning ? "
" No , mon p`ere . "
After dinner , he went to see his daughter - in - law .
The little princess was sitting at a small table , chattering with M'asha , her maid .
She grew pale on seeing her father - in - law .
She was much altered .
She was now plain rather than pretty .
Her cheeks had sunk , her lip was drawn up , and her eyes drawn down .
" Yes , I feel a kind of oppression , " she said in reply to the prince 's question as to how she felt .
" Do you want anything ? "
" No , merci , mon p`ere . "
" Well , all right , all right . "
He left the room and went to the waiting room where Alp'atych stood with bowed head .
" Has the snow been shoveled back ? "
" Yes , your excellency .
Forgive me for heaven 's sake ...
It was only my stupidity . "
" All right , all right , " interrupted the prince , and laughing his unnatural way , he stretched out his hand for Alp'atych to kiss , and then proceeded to his study .
Prince Vas'ili arrived that evening .
He was met in the avenue by coachmen and footmen , who , with loud shouts , dragged his sleighs up to one of the lodges over the road purposely laden with snow .
Prince Vas'ili and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them .
Anatole , having taken off his overcoat , sat with arms akimbo before a table on a corner of which he smilingly and absent - mindedly fixed his large and handsome eyes .
He regarded his whole life as a continual round of amusement which someone for some reason had to provide for him .
And he looked on this visit to a churlish old man and a rich and ugly heiress in the same way .
All this might , he thought , turn out very well and amusingly . "
And why not marry her if she really has so much money ?
That never does any harm , " thought Anatole .
" I say , Father , joking apart , is she very hideous ? "
Anatole asked , as if continuing a conversation the subject of which had often been mentioned during the journey .
" Enough !
What nonsense !
Above all , try to be respectful and cautious with the old prince . "
" If he starts a row I 'll go away , " said Prince Anatole .
" I ca n't bear those old men !
Eh ? "
" Remember , for you everything depends on this . "
In the meantime , not only was it known in the maidservants ' rooms that the minister and his son had arrived , but the appearance of both had been minutely described .
Princess Mary was sitting alone in her room , vainly trying to master her agitation .
" Why did they write , why did Lise tell me about it ?
It can never happen !
" she said , looking at herself in the glass . "
How shall I enter the drawing room ?
Even if I like him
I ca n't now be myself with him .
" The mere thought of her father 's look filled her with terror .
Having received this information , the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne , whose chattering voices had reached her from the corridor , went into Princess Mary 's room .
" You know they 've come , Marie ? " said the little princess , waddling in , and sinking heavily into an armchair .
She was no longer in the loose gown she generally wore in the morning , but had on one of her best dresses .
Her hair was carefully done and her face was animated , which , however , did not conceal its sunken and faded outlines .
Dressed as she used to be in Petersburg society , it was still more noticeable how much plainer she had become .
Some unobtrusive touch had been added to Mademoiselle Bourienne 's toilet which rendered her fresh and pretty face yet more attractive .
" What !
Are you going to remain as you are , dear princess ?
" she began .
" They 'll be announcing that the gentlemen are in the drawing room and we shall have to go down , and you have not smartened yourself up at all ! "
The little princess got up , rang for the maid , and hurriedly and merrily began to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be dressed .
Princess Mary 's self - esteem was wounded by the fact that the arrival of a suitor agitated her , and still more so by both her companions ' not having the least conception that it could be otherwise .
To tell them that she felt ashamed for herself and for them would be to betray her agitation , while to decline their offers to dress her would prolong their banter and insistence .
She flushed , her beautiful eyes grew dim , red blotches came on her face , and it took on the unattractive martyrlike expression it so often wore , as she submitted herself to Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise .
Both these women quite sincerely tried to make her look pretty .
" No really , my dear , this dress is not pretty , " said Lise , looking sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance .
" You have a maroon dress , have it fetched .
Really !
You know the fate of your whole life may be at stake .
But this one is too light , it 's not becoming ! "
They forgot that the frightened face and the figure could not be altered , and that however they might change the setting and adornment of that face , it would still remain piteous and plain .
" No , it will not do , " she said decidedly , clasping her hands . "
No , Mary , really this dress does not suit you .
I prefer you in your little gray everyday dress .
Now please , do it for my sake .
Katie , " she said to the maid , " bring the princess her gray dress , and you 'll see ,
Mademoiselle Bourienne , how I shall arrange it , " she added , smiling with a foretaste of artistic pleasure .
" Come , dear princess , " said Mademoiselle Bourienne , " just one more little effort . "
The little princess , taking the dress from the maid , came up to Princess Mary .
" Well , now we 'll arrange something quite simple and becoming , " she said .
The three voices , hers , Mademoiselle Bourienne 's , and Katie 's , who was laughing at something , mingled in a merry sound , like the chirping of birds .
" No , leave me alone , " said Princess Mary .
Her voice sounded so serious and so sad that the chirping of the birds was silenced at once .
They looked at the beautiful , large , thoughtful eyes full of tears and of thoughts , gazing shiningly and imploringly at them , and understood that it was useless and even cruel to insist .
" At least , change your coiffure , " said the little princess .
" Did n't I tell you , " she went on , turning reproachfully to Mademoiselle Bourienne , " Mary 's is a face which such a coiffure does not suit in the least .
Not in the least !
Please change it . "
" Leave me alone , please leave me alone !
It is all quite the same to me , " answered a voice struggling with tears .
Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to themselves that Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain , worse than usual , but it was too late .
She was looking at them with an expression they both knew , an expression thoughtful and sad .
" You will change it , wo n't you ? " said Lise .
And as Princess Mary gave no answer , she left the room .
Princess Mary was left alone .
She did not comply with Lise 's request , she not only left her hair as it was , but did not even look in her glass .
Letting her arms fall helplessly , she sat with downcast eyes and pondered .
A husband , a man , a strong dominant and strangely attractive being rose in her imagination , and carried her into a totally different happy world of his own .
But no , it is impossible , I am too ugly , " she thought .
" Please come to tea .
The prince will be out in a moment , " came the maid 's voice at the door .
A painful doubt filled her soul .
Could the joy of love , of earthly love for a man , be for her ?
In her thoughts of marriage Princess Mary dreamed of happiness and of children , but her strongest , most deeply hidden longing was for earthly love .
The more she tried to hide this feeling from others and even from herself , the stronger it grew .
" O God , " she said , " how am I to stifle in my heart these temptations of the devil ?
How am I to renounce forever these vile fancies , so as peacefully to fulfill Thy will ? "
And scarcely had she put that question than God gave her the answer in her own heart . "
Desire nothing for thyself , seek nothing , be not anxious or envious .
Man 's future and thy own fate must remain hidden from thee , but live so that thou mayest be ready for anything .
If it be God 's will to prove thee in the duties of marriage , be ready to fulfill His will . "
With this consoling thought ( but yet with a hope for the fulfillment of her forbidden earthly longing )
Princess Mary sighed , and having crossed herself went down , thinking neither of her gown and coiffure nor of how she would go in nor of what she would say .
What could all that matter in comparison with the will of God , without Whose care not a hair of man 's head can fall ?
CHAPTER IV
When Princess Mary came down , Prince Vas'ili and his son were already in the drawing room , talking to the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne .
When she entered with her heavy step , treading on her heels , the gentlemen and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the little princess , indicating her to the gentlemen , said : " Voil`a Marie ! "
Princess Mary saw them all and saw them in detail .
She saw Prince Vas'ili 's face , serious for an instant at the sight of her , but immediately smiling again , and the little princess curiously noting the impression " Marie " produced on the visitors .
And she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne , with her ribbon and pretty face , and her unusually animated look which was fixed on him , but him
she could not see , she only saw something large , brilliant , and handsome moving toward her as she entered the room .
Prince Vas'ili approached first , and she kissed the bold forehead that bent over her hand and answered his question by saying that , on the contrary , she remembered him quite well .
Then Anatole came up to her .
She still could not see him .
She only felt a soft hand taking hers firmly , and she touched with her lips a white forehead , over which was beautiful light - brown hair smelling of pomade .
When she looked up at him she was struck by his beauty .
Anatole was not quick - witted , nor ready or eloquent in conversation , but he had the faculty , so invaluable in society , of composure and imperturbable self - possession .
If a man lacking in self - confidence remains dumb on a first introduction and betrays a consciousness of the impropriety of such silence and an anxiety to find something to say , the effect is bad .
But Anatole was dumb , swung his foot , and smilingly examined the princess ' hair .
It was evident that he could be silent in this way for a very long time . "
If anyone finds this silence inconvenient , let him talk , but I do n't want to , " he seemed to say .
Besides this , in his behavior to women Anatole had a manner which particularly inspires in them curiosity , awe , and even love - a supercilious consciousness of his own superiority .
It was as if he said to them : " I know you , I know you , but why should I bother about you ?
You 'd be only too glad , of course . "
Perhaps he did not really think this when he met women - even probably he did not , for in general he thought very little - but his looks and manner gave that impression .
The princess felt this , and as if wishing to show him that she did not even dare expect to interest him , she turned to his father .
The conversation was general and animated , thanks to Princess Lise 's voice and little downy lip that lifted over her white teeth .
Prince Vas'ili readily adopted her tone and the little princess also drew Anatole , whom she hardly knew , into these amusing recollections of things that had never occurred .
Mademoiselle Bourienne also shared them and even Princess Mary felt herself pleasantly made to share in these merry reminiscences .
" Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all to ourselves , dear prince , " said the little princess ( of course , in French ) to Prince Vas'ili .
" It 's not as at Annette 's * receptions where you always ran away ; you remember cette ch`ere Annette ! "
* Anna P'avlovna .
" Ah , but you wo n't talk politics to me like Annette ! "
" And our little tea table ? "
" Oh , yes ! "
" Why is it you were never at Annette 's ? " the little princess asked Anatole . "
Ah , I know , I know , " she said with a sly glance , " your brother Hippolyte told me about your goings on .
Oh ! "
and she shook her finger at him , " I have even heard of your doings in Paris ! "
" And did n't Hippolyte tell you ? "
Oh , she is a pearl among women , Princess , " he added , turning to Princess Mary .
When Paris was mentioned , Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the opportunity of joining in the general current of recollections .
She took the liberty of inquiring whether it was long since Anatole had left Paris and how he had liked that city .
Anatole answered the Frenchwoman very readily and , looking at her with a smile , talked to her about her native land .
When he saw the pretty little Bourienne , Anatole came to the conclusion that he would not find Bald Hills dull either . "
Not at all bad !
" he thought , examining her , " not at all bad , that little companion !
I hope she will bring her along with her when we 're married , la petite est gentille . " *
* The little one is charming .
The old prince dressed leisurely in his study , frowning and considering what he was to do .
The coming of these visitors annoyed him .
" What are Prince Vas'ili and that son of his to me ?
Prince Vas'ili is a shallow braggart and his son , no doubt , is a fine specimen , " he grumbled to himself .
What angered him was that the coming of these visitors revived in his mind an unsettled question he always tried to stifle , one about which he always deceived himself .
The question was whether he could ever bring himself to part from his daughter and give her to a husband .
The prince never directly asked himself that question , knowing beforehand that he would have to answer it justly , and justice clashed not only with his feelings but with the very possibility of life .
Life without Princess Mary , little as he seemed to value her , was unthinkable to him . "
And why should she marry ?
" he thought .
" To be unhappy for certain .
There 's Lise , married to Andrew - a better husband one would think could hardly be found nowadays - but is she contented with her lot ?
And who would marry Marie for love ?
Plain and awkward !
They 'll take her for her connections and wealth .
Are there no women living unmarried , and even the happier for it ? "
So thought Prince Bolk'onski while dressing , and yet the question he was always putting off demanded an immediate answer .
Prince Vas'ili had brought his son with the evident intention of proposing , and today or tomorrow he would probably ask for an answer .
His birth and position in society were not bad . "
Well , I 've nothing against it , " the prince said to himself , " but he must be worthy of her .
And that is what we shall see . "
" That is what we shall see !
That is what we shall see ! "
he added aloud .
He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step , glancing rapidly round the company .
Got herself up like a fool ! "
he thought , looking irritably at her . "
She is shameless , and he ignores her ! "
He went straight up to Prince Vas'ili .
" Well ! How d'ye do ?
How d'ye do ?
Glad to see you ! "
" Friendship laughs at distance , " began Prince Vas'ili in his usual rapid , self - confident , familiar tone .
" Here is my second son ; please love and befriend him . "
Prince Bolk'onski surveyed Anatole .
" Fine young fellow !
Fine young fellow ! "
he said .
" Well , come and kiss me , " and he offered his cheek .
Anatole kissed the old man , and looked at him with curiosity and perfect composure , waiting for a display of the eccentricities his father had told him to expect .
Prince Bolk'onski sat down in his usual place in the corner of the sofa and , drawing up an armchair for Prince Vas'ili , pointed to it and began questioning him about political affairs and news .
He seemed to listen attentively to what Prince Vas'ili said , but kept glancing at Princess Mary .
" And so they are writing from Potsdam already ? " he said , repeating Prince Vas'ili 's last words .
Then rising , he suddenly went up to his daughter .
" Is it for visitors you 've got yourself up like that , eh ? " said he .
" Fine , very fine !
You have done up your hair in this new way for the visitors , and before the visitors I tell you that in future you are never to dare to change your way of dress without my consent . "
" It was my fault , mon p`ere , " interceded the little princess , with a blush .
" You must do as you please , " said Prince Bolk'onski , bowing to his daughter - in - law , " but she need not make a fool of herself ,
she 's plain enough as it is . "
And he sat down again , paying no more attention to his daughter , who was reduced to tears .
" On the contrary , that coiffure suits the princess very well , " said Prince Vas'ili .
" Now you , young prince , what 's your name ? " said Prince Bolk'onski , turning to Anatole , " come here , let us talk and get acquainted . "
" Now the fun begins , " thought Anatole , sitting down with a smile beside the old prince .
" Well , my dear boy , I hear you 've been educated abroad , not taught to read and write by the deacon , like your father and me .
Now tell me , my dear boy , are you serving in the Horse Guards ? " asked the old man , scrutinizing Anatole closely and intently .
" No , I have been transferred to the line , " said Anatole , hardly able to restrain his laughter .
" Ah !
That 's a good thing .
So , my dear boy , you wish to serve the Tsar and the country ?
It is wartime .
Such a fine fellow must serve .
Well , are you off to the front ? "
" No , Prince , our regiment has gone to the front , but I am attached ...
what is it
I am attached to ,
Papa ? " said Anatole , turning to his father with a laugh .
" A splendid soldier , splendid ! '
What am I attached to ! '
Ha , ha , ha ! "
laughed Prince Bolk'onski , and Anatole laughed still louder .
Suddenly Prince Bolk'onski frowned .
" You may go , " he said to Anatole .
Anatole returned smiling to the ladies .
" And so you 've had him educated abroad , Prince Vas'ili , have n't you ? " said the old prince to Prince Vas'ili .
" I have done my best for him , and I can assure you the education there is much better than ours . "
" Yes , everything is different nowadays , everything is changed .
The lad 's a fine fellow , a fine fellow !
Well , come with me now . "
He took Prince Vas'ili 's arm and led him to his study .
As soon as they were alone together , Prince Vas'ili announced his hopes and wishes to the old prince .
" Well , do you think I shall prevent her , that I ca n't part from her ? " said the old prince angrily .
" What an idea !
I 'm ready for it tomorrow !
Only let me tell you , I want to know my son - in - law better .
You know my principles - everything aboveboard !
I will ask her tomorrow in your presence ; if she is willing , then he can stay on .
He can stay and I 'll see . "
The old prince snorted . "
Let her marry , it 's all the same to me ! "
he screamed in the same piercing tone as when parting from his son .
" I will tell you frankly , " said Prince Vas'ili in the tone of a crafty man convinced of the futility of being cunning with so keen - sighted a companion .
" You know , you see right through people .
Anatole is no genius , but he is an honest , goodhearted lad ; an excellent son or kinsman . "
" All right , all right , we 'll see ! "
Their powers of reasoning , feeling , and observing immediately increased tenfold , and their life , which seemed to have been passed in darkness , was suddenly lit up by a new brightness , full of significance .
Princess Mary grew quite unconscious of her face and coiffure .
The handsome open face of the man who might perhaps be her husband absorbed all her attention .
He seemed to her kind , brave , determined , manly , and magnanimous .
She felt convinced of that .
Thousands of dreams of a future family life continually rose in her imagination .
She drove them away and tried to conceal them .
" But am I not too cold with him ? " thought the princess .
And Princess Mary tried , but could not manage , to be cordial to her new guest . "
Poor girl , she 's devilish ugly ! "
thought Anatole .
Mademoiselle Bourienne , also roused to great excitement by Anatole 's arrival , thought in another way .
Mademoiselle Bourienne knew a story , heard from her aunt but finished in her own way , which she liked to repeat to herself .
It was the story of a girl who had been seduced , and to whom her poor mother ( sa pauvre m`ere ) appeared , and reproached her for yielding to a man without being married .
Mademoiselle Bourienne was often touched to tears as in imagination she told this story to him , her seducer .
And now he , a real Russian prince , had appeared .
He would carry her away and then sa pauvre m`ere would appear and he would marry her .
So her future shaped itself in Mademoiselle Bourienne 's head at the very time she was talking to Anatole about Paris .
Although in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a man tired of being run after by women , his vanity was flattered by the spectacle of his power over these three women .
Besides that , he was beginning to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselle Bourienne that passionate animal feeling which was apt to master him with great suddenness and prompt him to the coarsest and most reckless actions .
After tea , the company went into the sitting room and Princess Mary was asked to play on the clavichord .
Anatole , laughing and in high spirits , came and leaned on his elbows , facing her and beside Mademoiselle Bourienne .
Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion .
Her favorite sonata bore her into a most intimately poetic world and the look she felt upon her made that world still more poetic .
But Anatole 's expression , though his eyes were fixed on her , referred not to her but to the movements of Mademoiselle Bourienne 's little foot , which he was then touching with his own under the clavichord .
Mademoiselle Bourienne was also looking at Princess Mary , and in her lovely eyes there was a look of fearful joy and hope that was also new to the princess .
" How she loves me ! " thought Princess Mary .
" How happy I am now , and how happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband !
Husband ?
Can it be possible ?
" she thought , not daring to look at his face , but still feeling his eyes gazing at her .
In the evening , after supper , when all were about to retire , Anatole kissed Princess Mary 's hand .
She did not know how she found the courage , but she looked straight into his handsome face as it came near to her shortsighted eyes .
Turning from Princess Mary he went up and kissed Mademoiselle Bourienne 's hand .
( This was not etiquette , but then he did everything so simply and with such assurance ! )
Mademoiselle Bourienne flushed , and gave the princess a frightened look .
" What delicacy ! " thought the princess .
" Is it possible that Am'elie " ( Mademoiselle Bourienne ) " thinks I could be jealous of her , and not value her pure affection and devotion to me ? "
She went up to her and kissed her warmly .
Anatole went up to kiss the little princess ' hand .
" No
! No !
No !
When your father writes to tell me that you are behaving well
I will give you my hand to kiss .
Not till then !
" she said .
And smilingly raising a finger at him , she left the room .
CHAPTER V
They all separated , but , except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as he got into bed , all kept awake a long time that night .
She feared to look round , it seemed to her that someone was there standing behind the screen in the dark corner .
And this someone was he - the devil - and he was also this man with the white forehead , black eyebrows , and red lips .
She rang for her maid and asked her to sleep in her room .
The little princess grumbled to her maid that her bed was badly made .
She could not lie either on her face or on her side .
She sat in an armchair in her dressing jacket and nightcap and Katie , sleepy and disheveled , beat and turned the heavy feather bed for the third time , muttering to herself .
The old prince did not sleep either .
T'ikhon , half asleep , heard him pacing angrily about and snorting .
The old prince felt as though he had been insulted through his daughter .
The insult was the more pointed because it concerned not himself but another , his daughter , whom he loved more than himself .
He kept telling himself that he would consider the whole matter and decide what was right and how he should act , but instead of that he only excited himself more and more .
" The first man that turns up - she forgets her father and everything else , runs upstairs and does up her hair and wags her tail and is unlike herself !
Glad to throw her father over !
And she knew I should notice it .
Fr ...
fr ...
fr !
And do n't I see that that idiot had eyes only for Bourienne -
I shall have to get rid of her .
And how is it she has not pride enough to see it ?
If she has no pride for herself she might at least have some for my sake !
She must be shown that the blockhead thinks nothing of her and looks only at Bourienne .
No , she has no pride ...
but I 'll let her see .... "
" What devil brought them here ? " thought he , while T'ikhon was putting the nightshirt over his dried - up old body and gray - haired chest .
" I never invited them .
They came to disturb my life - and there is not much of it left . "
" Devil take ' em ! " he muttered , while his head was still covered by the shirt .
T'ikhon knew his master 's habit of sometimes thinking aloud , and therefore met with unaltered looks the angrily inquisitive expression of the face that emerged from the shirt .
" Gone to bed ? " asked the prince .
T'ikhon , like all good valets , instinctively knew the direction of his master 's thoughts .
He guessed that the question referred to Prince Vas'ili and his son .
" They have gone to bed and put out their lights , your excellency . "
When Princess Mary went to her father 's room at the usual hour , Mademoiselle Bourienne and Anatole met in the conservatory .
Princess Mary went to the door of the study with special trepidation .
It seemed to her that not only did everybody know that her fate would be decided that day , but that they also knew what she thought about it .
She read this in T'ikhon 's face and in that of Prince Vas'ili 's valet , who made her a low bow when she met him in the corridor carrying hot water .
The old prince was very affectionate and careful in his treatment of his daughter that morning .
Princess Mary well knew this painstaking expression of her father 's .
He came to the point at once , treating her ceremoniously .
" I have had a proposition made me concerning you , " he said with an unnatural smile .
Last night a proposition was made me on your account and , as you know my principles , I refer it to you . "
" How am I to understand you , mon p`ere ? " said the princess , growing pale and then blushing .
" How understand me ! "
cried her father angrily . "
Prince Vas'ili finds you to his taste as a daughter - in - law and makes a proposal to you on his pupil 's behalf .
That 's how it 's to be understood ! '
How understand it ' ! ...
And I ask you ! "
" I do not know what you think , Father , " whispered the princess .
" I ?
I ?
What of me ?
Leave me out of the question .
I 'm not going to get married .
What about you ?
That 's what I want to know . "
The princess saw that her father regarded the matter with disapproval , but at that moment the thought occurred to her that her fate would be decided now or never .
She had no time to finish .
The old prince interrupted her .
" That 's admirable ! "
he shouted .
" He will take you with your dowry and take Mademoiselle Bourienne into the bargain .
She 'll be the wife , while you ... "
The prince stopped .
He saw the effect these words had produced on his daughter .
She lowered her head and was ready to burst into tears .
" Now then , now then , I 'm only joking ! " he said . "
Remember this , Princess
, I hold to the principle that a maiden has a full right to choose .
I give you freedom .
Only remember that your life 's happiness depends on your decision .
Never mind me ! "
" But I do not know , Father ! "
" There 's no need to talk !
He receives his orders and will marry you or anybody ; but you are free to choose ....
Go to your room , think it over , and come back in an hour and tell me in his presence :
yes or no .
I know you will pray over it .
Well , pray if you like , but you had better think it over .
Go !
Yes or no , yes or no ,
yes or no ! "
he still shouted when the princess , as if lost in a fog , had already staggered out of the study .
Her fate was decided and happily decided .
But what her father had said about Mademoiselle Bourienne was dreadful .
It was untrue to be sure , but still it was terrible , and she could not help thinking of it .
She was going straight on through the conservatory , neither seeing nor hearing anything , when suddenly the well - known whispering of Mademoiselle Bourienne aroused her .
She raised her eyes , and two steps away saw Anatole embracing the Frenchwoman and whispering something to her .
With a horrified expression on his handsome face , Anatole looked at Princess Mary , but did not at once take his arm from the waist of Mademoiselle Bourienne who had not yet seen her .
" Who 's that ?
Why ?
Wait a moment ! "
Anatole 's face seemed to say .
Princess Mary looked at them in silence .
She could not understand it .
At last Mademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away .
Anatole bowed to Princess Mary with a gay smile , as if inviting her to join in a laugh at this strange incident , and then shrugging his shoulders went to the door that led to his own apartments .
An hour later , T'ikhon came to call Princess Mary to the old prince ; he added that Prince Vas'ili was also there .
When T'ikhon came to her Princess Mary was sitting on the sofa in her room , holding the weeping Mademoiselle Bourienne in her arms and gently stroking her hair .
The princess ' beautiful eyes with all their former calm radiance were looking with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselle Bourienne 's pretty face .
" No , Princess , I have lost your affection forever ! " said Mademoiselle Bourienne .
" Why ?
I love you more than ever , " said Princess Mary , " and I will try to do all I can for your happiness . "
" But you despise me .
You who are so pure can never understand being so carried away by passion .
Oh , only my poor mother ... "
" I quite understand , " answered Princess Mary , with a sad smile .
"
Calm yourself , my dear .
I will go to my father , " she said , and went out .
He hurriedly took a pinch of snuff .
" Ah , my dear , my dear ! "
he began , rising and taking her by both hands .
Then , sighing , he added : " My son 's fate is in your hands .
Decide , my dear , good , gentle Marie , whom I have always loved as a daughter ! "
He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye .
" Fr ... fr ... " snorted Prince Bolk'onski . "
The prince is making a proposition to you in his pupil's - I mean , his son's - name .
Do you wish or not to be Prince Anatole Kur'agin 's wife ?
Reply : yes or no , " he shouted , " and then I shall reserve the right to state my opinion also .
Yes , my opinion , and only my opinion , " added Prince Bolk'onski , turning to Prince Vas'ili and answering his imploring look . "
Yes , or no ? "
" My desire is never to leave you , Father , never to separate my life from yours .
I do n't wish to marry , " she answered positively , glancing at Prince Vas'ili and at her father with her beautiful eyes .
" Humbug ! Nonsense !
Humbug , humbug , humbug ! "
Prince Vas'ili rose .
" My dear , I must tell you that this is a moment I shall never , never forget .
But , my dear , will you not give us a little hope of touching this heart , so kind and generous ?
Say ' perhaps ' ...
The future is so long .
Say ' perhaps . ' "
" Prince , what I have said is all there is in my heart .
I thank you for the honor , but I shall never be your son 's wife . "
" Well , so that 's finished , my dear fellow !
I am very glad to have seen you .
Very glad !
Go back to your rooms , Princess .
Go ! " said the old prince .
" Very , very glad to have seen you , " repeated he , embracing Prince Vas'ili .
" My vocation is a different one , " thought Princess Mary .
" My vocation is to be happy with another kind of happiness , the happiness of love and self - sacrifice .
And cost what it may , I will arrange poor Am'elie 's happiness , she loves him so passionately , and so passionately repents .
I will do all I can to arrange the match between them .
If he is not rich I will give her the means ; I will ask my father and Andrew .
I shall be so happy when she is his wife .
She is so unfortunate , a stranger , alone , helpless !
And , oh God , how passionately she must love him if she could so far forget herself !
Perhaps I might have done the same ! ...
" thought Princess Mary .
CHAPTER VI
It was long since the Rost'ovs had news of Nicholas .
Not till midwinter was the count at last handed a letter addressed in his son 's handwriting .
On receiving it , he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarm and haste , trying to escape notice , closed the door , and began to read the letter .
Anna Mikh'aylovna , though her circumstances had improved , was still living with the Rost'ovs .
" My dear friend ? " said she , in a tone of pathetic inquiry , prepared to sympathize in any way .
The count sobbed yet more .
" Nik'olenka ... a letter ...
wa ...
a ... s ... wounded ...
my darling boy ... the countess ... promoted to be an officer ... thank God ...
How tell the little countess ! "
Each time that these hints began to make the countess anxious and she glanced uneasily at the count and at Anna Mikh'aylovna , the latter very adroitly turned the conversation to insignificant matters .
After dinner , she rushed headlong after Anna Mikh'aylovna and , dashing at her , flung herself on her neck as soon as she overtook her in the sitting room .
" Auntie , darling , do tell me what it is ! "
" Nothing , my dear . "
" No , dearest , sweet one , honey , I wo n't give up -
I know you know something . "
Anna Mikh'aylovna shook her head .
" You are a little slyboots , " she said .
" A letter from Nik'olenka !
I 'm sure of it ! "
exclaimed Nat'asha , reading confirmation in Anna Mikh'aylovna 's face .
" But for God 's sake , be careful , you know how it may affect your mamma . "
" I will , I will , only tell me !
You wo n't ?
Then I will go and tell at once . "
Anna Mikh'aylovna , in a few words , told her the contents of the letter , on condition that she should tell no one .
" No , on my true word of honor , " said Nat'asha , crossing herself , " I wo n't tell anyone ! "
and she ran off at once to S'onya .
" Nik'olenka ... wounded ... a letter , " she announced in gleeful triumph .
" Nicholas ! " was all S'onya said , instantly turning white .
Nat'asha , seeing the impression the news of her brother 's wound produced on S'onya , felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the news .
She rushed to S'onya , hugged her , and began to cry .
" A little wound , but he has been made an officer ; he is well now , he wrote himself , " said she through her tears .
" There now !
It 's true that all you women are crybabies , " remarked P'etya , pacing the room with large , resolute strides . "
Now I 'm very glad , very glad indeed , that my brother has distinguished himself so .
You are all blubberers and understand nothing . "
Nat'asha smiled through her tears .
" You have n't read the letter ? " asked S'onya .
" No , but she said that it was all over and that he 's now an officer . "
" Thank God ! "
said S'onya , crossing herself .
" But perhaps she deceived you .
Let us go to Mamma . "
P'etya paced the room in silence for a time .
" If I 'd been in Nik'olenka 's place I would have killed even more of those Frenchmen , " he said .
" What nasty brutes they are !
I 'd have killed so many that there 'd have been a heap of them . "
" Hold your tongue , P'etya , what a goose you are ! "
" I 'm not a goose , but they are who cry about trifles , " said P'etya .
" Do you remember him ? "
Nat'asha suddenly asked , after a moment 's silence .
S'onya smiled .
" Do I remember Nicholas ? "
" No , S'onya , but do you remember so that you remember him perfectly , remember everything ? " said Nat'asha , with an expressive gesture , evidently wishing to give her words a very definite meaning .
" I remember Nik'olenka too , I remember him well , " she said .
" But I do n't remember Bor'is .
I do n't remember him a bit . "
" What !
You do n't remember Bor'is ? "
asked S'onya in surprise .
" It 's not that I do n't remember - I know what he is like , but not as I remember Nik'olenka .
Him - I just shut my eyes and remember , but Bor'is ...
No ! "
( She shut her eyes . )
" No ! there 's nothing at all . "
Nat'asha looked at S'onya with wondering and inquisitive eyes , and said nothing .
She felt that S'onya was speaking the truth , that there was such love as S'onya was speaking of .
But Nat'asha had not yet felt anything like it .
She believed it could be , but did not understand it .
" Shall you write to him ? " she asked .
S'onya became thoughtful .
The question of how to write to Nicholas , and whether she ought to write , tormented her .
Now that he was already an officer and a wounded hero , would it be right to remind him of herself and , as it might seem , of the obligations to her he had taken on himself ?
" I do n't know .
I think if he writes , I will write too , " she said , blushing .
" And you wo n't feel ashamed to write to him ? "
S'onya smiled .
" No . "
" And I should be ashamed to write to Bor'is .
I 'm not going to . "
" Why should you be ashamed ? "
" Well , I do n't know .
It 's awkward and would make me ashamed . "
" And I know why she 'd be ashamed , " said P'etya , offended by Nat'asha 's previous remark .
" P'etya , you 're a stupid ! " said Nat'asha .
" Not more stupid than you , madam , " said the nine - year - old P'etya , with the air of an old brigadier .
The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikh'aylovna 's hints at dinner .
On retiring to her own room , she sat in an armchair , her eyes fixed on a miniature portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox , while the tears kept coming into her eyes .
Anna Mikh'aylovna , with the letter , came on tiptoe to the countess ' door and paused .
" Do n't come in , " she said to the old count who was following her .
" Come later . "
And she went in , closing the door behind her .
The count put his ear to the keyhole and listened .
At first he heard the sound of indifferent voices , then Anna Mikh'aylovna 's voice alone in a long speech , then a cry , then silence , then both voices together with glad intonations , and then footsteps .
Anna Mikh'aylovna opened the door .
Her face wore the proud expression of a surgeon who has just performed a difficult operation and admits the public to appreciate his skill .
" It is done ! "
she said to the count , pointing triumphantly to the countess , who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait and in the other the letter , and pressing them alternately to her lips .
V'era , Nat'asha , S'onya , and P'etya now entered the room , and the reading of the letter began .
The countess was crying .
" Why are you crying , Mamma ? " asked V'era .
" From all he says one should be glad and not cry . "
This was quite true , but the count , the countess , and Nat'asha looked at her reproachfully . "
And who is it she takes after ? "
thought the countess .
Nicholas ' letter was read over hundreds of times , and those who were considered worthy to hear it had to come to the countess , for she did not let it out of her hands .
The tutors came , and the nurses , and Dm'itri , and several acquaintances , and the countess reread the letter each time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it fresh proofs of Nik'olenka 's virtues .
The universal experience of ages , showing that children do grow imperceptibly from the cradle to manhood , did not exist for the countess .
Her son 's growth toward manhood , at each of its stages , had seemed as extraordinary to her as if there had never existed the millions of human beings who grew up in the same way .
" What a style !
How charmingly he describes ! "
said she , reading the descriptive part of the letter . "
And what a soul !
Not a word about himself ....
Not a word !
About some Den'isov or other , though he himself , I dare say , is braver than any of them .
He says nothing about his sufferings .
What a heart !
How like him it is !
And how he has remembered everybody !
Not forgetting anyone .
I always said when he was only so high - I always said .... "
Anna Mikh'aylovna , practical woman that she was , had even managed by favor with army authorities to secure advantageous means of communication for herself and her son .
She had opportunities of sending her letters to the Grand Duke Constantine P'avlovich , who commanded the Guards .
And so it was decided to send the letters and money by the Grand Duke 's courier to Bor'is and Bor'is was to forward them to Nicholas .
CHAPTER VII
On the twelfth of November , Kut'uzov 's active army , in camp before Olm"utz , was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors - the Russian and the Austrian .
The Guards , just arrived from Russia , spent the night ten miles from Olm"utz and next morning were to come straight to the review , reaching the field at Olm"utz by ten o'clock .
Rost'ov was particularly in need of money now that the troops , after their active service , were stationed near Olm"utz and the camp swarmed with well - provisioned sutlers and Austrian Jews offering all sorts of tempting wares .
Rost'ov , who had just celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bought Den'isov 's horse , Bedouin , was in debt all round , to his comrades and the sutlers .
On receiving Bor'is ' letter he rode with a fellow officer to Olm"utz , dined there , drank a bottle of wine , and then set off alone to the Guards ' camp to find his old playmate .
Rost'ov had not yet had time to get his uniform .
He had on a shabby cadet jacket , decorated with a soldier 's cross , equally shabby cadet 's riding breeches lined with worn leather , and an officer 's saber with a sword knot .
The Don horse he was riding was one he had bought from a Cossack during the campaign , and he wore a crumpled hussar cap stuck jauntily back on one side of his head .
As he rode up to the camp he thought how he would impress Bor'is and all his comrades of the Guards by his appearance - that of a fighting hussar who had been under fire .
The Guards had made their whole march as if on a pleasure trip , parading their cleanliness and discipline .
They had come by easy stages , their knapsacks conveyed on carts , and the Austrian authorities had provided excellent dinners for the officers at every halting place .
Bor'is had been quartered , and had marched all the way , with Berg who was already in command of a company .
Berg , who had obtained his captaincy during the campaign , had gained the confidence of his superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and had arranged his money matters very satisfactorily .
Berg and Bor'is , having rested after yesterday 's march , were sitting , clean and neatly dressed , at a round table in the clean quarters allotted to them , playing chess .
Berg held a smoking pipe between his knees .
" Well , how are you going to get out of that ? " he remarked .
" We 'll try to , " replied Berg , touching a pawn and then removing his hand .
At that moment the door opened .
" Here he is at last ! " shouted Rost'ov . "
And Berg too !
Oh , you petisenfans , allay cushay dormir ! "
he exclaimed , imitating his Russian nurse 's French , at which he and Bor'is used to laugh long ago .
" Dear me , how you have changed ! "
Bor'is rose to meet Rost'ov , but in doing so did not omit to steady and replace some chessmen that were falling .
He was about to embrace his friend , but Nicholas avoided him .
He wanted to pinch him , push him , do anything but kiss him - a thing everybody did .
But notwithstanding this , Bor'is embraced him in a quiet , friendly way and kissed him three times .
Both had changed greatly since they last met and both were in a hurry to show the changes that had taken place in them .
" Oh , you damned dandies !
The German landlady , hearing Rost'ov 's loud voice , popped her head in at the door .
" Eh , is she pretty ? "
he asked with a wink .
" Why do you shout so ?
You 'll frighten them ! " said Bor'is .
" I did not expect you today , " he added .
" I only sent you the note yesterday by Bolk'onski - an adjutant of Kut'uzov 's , who 's a friend of mine .
I did not think he would get it to you so quickly ....
Well , how are you ?
Been under fire already ?
" asked Bor'is .
Without answering , Rost'ov shook the soldier 's Cross of St. George fastened to the cording of his uniform and , indicating a bandaged arm , glanced at Berg with a smile .
" As you see , " he said .
" Indeed ?
Yes , yes ! " said Bor'is , with a smile . "
And we too have had a splendid march .
You know , of course , that His Imperial Highness rode with our regiment all the time , so that we had every comfort and every advantage .
What receptions we had in Poland !
What dinners and balls !
I ca n't tell you .
And the Tsar'evich was very gracious to all our officers . "
And the two friends told each other of their doings , the one of his hussar revels and life in the fighting line , the other of the pleasures and advantages of service under members of the Imperial family .
" Oh , you Guards ! " said Rost'ov .
" I say , send for some wine . "
Bor'is made a grimace .
" If you really want it , " said he .
He went to his bed , drew a purse from under the clean pillow , and sent for wine .
" Yes , and I have some money and a letter to give you , " he added .
Rost'ov took the letter and , throwing the money on the sofa , put both arms on the table and began to read .
After reading a few lines , he glanced angrily at Berg , then , meeting his eyes , hid his face behind the letter .
" Well , they 've sent you a tidy sum , " said Berg , eying the heavy purse that sank into the sofa .
" As for us , Count , we get along on our pay .
I can tell you for myself ... "
I 'll go at once , to be out of your way !
" Oh , do n't mention it , Count !
I quite understand , " said Berg , getting up and speaking in a muffled and guttural voice .
" Go across to our hosts : they invited you , " added Bor'is .
" Oh dear , what a beast I am ! " muttered Rost'ov , as he read the letter .
" Why ? "
" Oh , what a pig I am , not to have written and to have given them such a fright !
Oh , what a pig I am ! "
he repeated , flushing suddenly . "
Well , have you sent Gabriel for some wine ?
All right let 's have some ! "
" What nonsense !
Much I need it ! "
said Rost'ov , throwing the letter under the table .
" Why have you thrown that away ? " asked Bor'is .
" It is some letter of recommendation ... what the devil do I want it for ! "
" Why ' What the devil ' ? " said Bor'is , picking it up and reading the address . "
This letter would be of great use to you . "
" I want nothing , and I wo n't be anyone 's adjutant . "
" Why not ? " inquired Bor'is .
" It 's a lackey 's job ! "
" You are still the same dreamer , I see , " remarked Bor'is , shaking his head .
" And you 're still the same diplomatist !
But that 's not the point ...
Come , how are you ? " asked Rost'ov .
" Well , as you see .
So far everything 's all right , but I confess I should much like to be an adjutant and not remain at the front . "
" Why ? "
" Because when once a man starts on military service , he should try to make as successful a career of it as possible . "
" Oh , that 's it ! "
said Rost'ov , evidently thinking of something else .
He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend 's eyes , evidently trying in vain to find the answer to some question .
Old Gabriel brought in the wine .
" Should n't we now send for Berg ? " asked Bor'is . "
He would drink with you .
I ca n't . "
" Well , send for him ... and how do you get on with that German ? " asked Rost'ov , with a contemptuous smile .
" He is a very , very nice , honest , and pleasant fellow , " answered Bor'is .
Again Rost'ov looked intently into Bor'is ' eyes and sighed .
Berg returned , and over the bottle of wine conversation between the three officers became animated .
The Guardsmen told Rost'ov of their march and how they had been made much of in Russia , Poland , and abroad .
They spoke of the sayings and doings of their commander , the Grand Duke , and told stories of his kindness and irascibility .
With a pleasant smile Berg related how the Grand Duke had ridden up to him in a violent passion , shouting : " Arnauts ! "
( " Arnauts " was the Tsar'evich 's favorite expression when he was in a rage ) and called for the company commander .
" Would you believe it , Count , I was not at all alarmed , because I knew I was right .
Without boasting , you know , I may say that I know the Army Orders by heart and know the Regulations as well as I do the Lord 's Prayer .
So , Count , there never is any negligence in my company , and so my conscience was at ease .
I came forward ....
" Well , he stormed at me , as the saying is , stormed and stormed and stormed !
It was not a matter of life but rather of death , as the saying is . '
Albanians ! ' and ' devils ! '
and ' To Siberia ! '
" said Berg with a sagacious smile .
" I knew I was in the right
so I kept silent ; was not that best , Count ? ... '
Hey , are you dumb ? '
he shouted .
Still I remained silent .
And what do you think , Count ?
The next day it was not even mentioned in the Orders of the Day .
That 's what keeping one 's head means .
That 's the way , Count , " said Berg , lighting his pipe and emitting rings of smoke .
" Yes , that was fine , " said Rost'ov , smiling .
But Bor'is noticed that he was preparing to make fun of Berg , and skillfully changed the subject .
He asked him to tell them how and where he got his wound .
This pleased Rost'ov and he began talking about it , and as he went on became more and more animated .
Rost'ov was a truthful young man and would on no account have told a deliberate lie .
He began his story meaning to tell everything just as it happened , but imperceptibly , involuntarily , and inevitably he lapsed into falsehood .
He could not tell them simply that everyone went at a trot and that he fell off his horse and sprained his arm and then ran as hard as he could from a Frenchman into the wood .
Besides , to tell everything as it really happened , it would have been necessary to make an effort of will to tell only what happened .
It is very difficult to tell the truth , and young people are rarely capable of it .
And so he told them all that .
Having been sent with papers from Kut'uzov to the Tsar'evich , he looked in on Bor'is , hoping to find him alone .
Rost'ov flushed up on noticing this , but he did not care , this was a mere stranger .
Glancing , however , at Bor'is , he saw that he too seemed ashamed of the hussar of the line .
Bor'is inquired what news there might be on the staff , and what , without indiscretion , one might ask about our plans .
" We shall probably advance , " replied Bolk'onski , evidently reluctant to say more in the presence of a stranger .
Berg took the opportunity to ask , with great politeness , whether , as was rumored , the allowance of forage money to captains of companies would be doubled .
To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could give no opinion on such an important government order , and Berg laughed gaily .
" As to your business , " Prince Andrew continued , addressing Bor'is , " we will talk of it later " ( and he looked round at Rost'ov ) .
" Come to me after the review and we will do what is possible . "
Were you there ? "
" I was there , " said Rost'ov angrily , as if intending to insult the aide - de - camp .
Bolk'onski noticed the hussar 's state of mind , and it amused him .
With a slightly contemptuous smile , he said : " Yes , there are many stories now told about that affair ! "
" Yes , stories ! " repeated Rost'ov loudly , looking with eyes suddenly grown furious , now at Bor'is , now at Bolk'onski . "
Yes , many stories !
But our stories are the stories of men who have been under the enemy 's fire !
Our stories have some weight , not like the stories of those fellows on the staff who get rewards without doing anything ! "
" Of whom you imagine me to be one ? " said Prince Andrew , with a quiet and particularly amiable smile .
A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for this man 's self - possession mingled at that moment in Rost'ov 's soul .
" I am not talking about you , " he said , " I do n't know you and , frankly , I do n't want to .
I am speaking of the staff in general . "
Well then , on Friday after the review I shall expect you , Drubetsk'oy .
Au revoir ! "
exclaimed Prince Andrew , and with a bow to them both he went out .
Only when Prince Andrew was gone did Rost'ov think of what he ought to have said .
And he was still more angry at having omitted to say it .
He ordered his horse at once and , coldly taking leave of Bor'is , rode home .
Should he go to headquarters next day and challenge that affected adjutant , or really let the matter drop , was the question that worried him all the way .
CHAPTER VIII
The day after Rost'ov had been to see Bor'is , a review was held of the Austrian and Russian troops , both those freshly arrived from Russia and those who had been campaigning under Kut'uzov .
The two Emperors , the Russian with his heir the Tsar'evich , and the Austrian with the Archduke , inspected the allied army of eighty thousand men .
From early morning the smart clean troops were on the move , forming up on the field before the fortress .
From early morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and by ten o'clock all had been brought into due order .
The ranks were drawn up on the vast field .
The whole army was extended in three lines : the cavalry in front , behind it the artillery , and behind that again the infantry .
A space like a street was left between each two lines of troops .
But they all stood in the same lines , under one command , and in a like order .
Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper : " They 're coming !
They 're coming ! "
Alarmed voices were heard , and a stir of final preparation swept over all the troops .
From the direction of Olm"utz in front of them , a group was seen approaching .
And at that moment , though the day was still , a light gust of wind blowing over the army slightly stirred the streamers on the lances and the unfolded standards fluttered against their staffs .
It looked as if by that slight motion the army itself was expressing its joy at the approach of the Emperors .
One voice was heard shouting : " Eyes front ! "
Then , like the crowing of cocks at sunrise , this was repeated by others from various sides and all became silent .
In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of horses was heard .
This was the Emperors ' suites .
The Emperors rode up to the flank , and the trumpets of the first cavalry regiment played the general march .
It seemed as though not the trumpeters were playing , but as if the army itself , rejoicing at the Emperors ' approach , had naturally burst into music .
Amid these sounds , only the youthful kindly voice of the Emperor Alexander was clearly heard .
He gave the words of greeting , and the first regiment roared " Hurrah ! "
so deafeningly , continuously , and joyfully that the men themselves were awed by their multitude and the immensity of the power they constituted .
" Hurrah !
Hurrah !
Hurrah ! " thundered from all sides , one regiment after another greeting the Tsar with the strains of the march , and then " Hurrah ! " ...
Then the general march , and again " Hurrah !
Hurrah ! "
growing ever stronger and fuller and merging into a deafening roar .
Upon them the undivided , tensely passionate attention of that whole mass of men was concentrated .
Rost'ov was not far from the trumpeters , and with his keen sight had recognized the Tsar and watched his approach .
When he was within twenty paces , and Nicholas could clearly distinguish every detail of his handsome , happy young face , he experienced a feeling of tenderness and ecstasy such as he had never before known .
Every trait and every movement of the Tsar 's seemed to him enchanting .
Stopping in front of the P'avlograds , the Tsar said something in French to the Austrian Emperor and smiled .
Seeing that smile , Rost'ov involuntarily smiled himself and felt a still stronger flow of love for his sovereign .
He longed to show that love in some way and knowing that this was impossible was ready to cry .
The Tsar called the colonel of the regiment and said a few words to him .
" Oh God , what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me ? " thought Rost'ov .
" I should die of happiness ! "
The Tsar addressed the officers also : " I thank you all , gentlemen , I thank you with my whole heart . "
To Rost'ov every word sounded like a voice from heaven .
How gladly would he have died at once for his Tsar !
" You have earned the St. George 's standards and will be worthy of them . "
" Oh , to die , to die for him , " thought Rost'ov .
The Tsar said something more which Rost'ov did not hear , and the soldiers , straining their lungs , shouted " Hurrah ! "
Rost'ov too , bending over his saddle , shouted " Hurrah ! " with all his might , feeling that he would like to injure himself by that shout , if only to express his rapture fully .
The Tsar stopped a few minutes in front of the hussars as if undecided .
" How can the Emperor be undecided ? " thought Rost'ov , but then even this indecision appeared to him majestic and enchanting , like everything else the Tsar did .
That hesitation lasted only an instant .
Farther and farther he rode away , stopping at other regiments , till at last only his white plumes were visible to Rost'ov from amid the suites that surrounded the Emperors .
Among the gentlemen of the suite , Rost'ov noticed Bolk'onski , sitting his horse indolently and carelessly .
Rost'ov recalled their quarrel of yesterday and the question presented itself whether he ought or ought not to challenge Bolk'onski . "
Of course not ! "
he now thought .
" Is it worth thinking or speaking of it at such a moment ?
At a time of such love , such rapture , and such self - sacrifice , what do any of our quarrels and affronts matter ?
I love and forgive everybody now . "
Before he reached him , Rost'ov , who was a splendid horseman , spurred Bedouin twice and successfully put him to the showy trot in which the animal went when excited .
" Fine fellows , the P'avlograds ! " remarked the Emperor .
" My God , how happy I should be if he ordered me to leap into the fire this instant ! " thought Rost'ov .
But the talk in every group was chiefly about the Emperor Alexander .
His every word and movement was described with ecstasy .
They all had but one wish : to advance as soon as possible against the enemy under the Emperor 's command .
Commanded by the Emperor himself they could not fail to vanquish anyone , be it whom it might : so thought Rost'ov and most of the officers after the review .
All were then more confident of victory than the winning of two battles would have made them .
CHAPTER IX
he reflected .
In spite of this , or rather because of it , next day , November 15 , after dinner he again went to Olm"utz and , entering the house occupied by Kut'uzov , asked for Bolk'onski .
One adjutant , nearest the door , was sitting at the table in a Persian dressing gown , writing .
Another , the red , stout Nesv'itski , lay on a bed with his arms under his head , laughing with an officer who had sat down beside him .
A third was playing a Viennese waltz on the clavichord , while a fourth , lying on the clavichord , sang the tune .
Bolk'onski was not there .
None of these gentlemen changed his position on seeing Bor'is .
Bor'is thanked him and went to the reception room , where he found some ten officers and generals .
More than ever was Bor'is resolved to serve in future not according to the written code , but under this unwritten law .
He felt now that merely by having been recommended to Prince Andrew he had already risen above the general who at the front had the power to annihilate him , a lieutenant of the Guards .
Prince Andrew came up to him and took his hand .
" I am very sorry you did not find me in yesterday .
I was fussing about with Germans all day .
We went with Weyrother to survey the dispositions .
When Germans start being accurate , there 's no end to it ! "
Bor'is smiled , as if he understood what Prince Andrew was alluding to as something generally known .
But it was the first time he had heard Weyrother 's name , or even the term " dispositions . "
" Well , my dear fellow , so you still want to be an adjutant ?
I have been thinking about you . "
" Yes , I was thinking "- for some reason Bor'is could not help blushing-"of asking the commander in chief .
He has had a letter from Prince Kur'agin about me .
I only wanted to ask because I fear the Guards wo n't be in action , " he added as if in apology .
" All right , all right .
We 'll talk it over , " replied Prince Andrew .
" Only let me report this gentleman 's business , and I shall be at your disposal . "
He turned away and waited impatiently for Prince Andrew 's return from the commander in chief 's room .
" You see , my dear fellow , I have been thinking about you , " said Prince Andrew when they had gone into the large room where the clavichord was .
" It 's no use your going to the commander in chief .
There will soon be a battalion of us aides - de - camp and adjutants !
Everything is now centered round the Emperor .
So we will go to Dolgor'ukov ; I have to go there anyhow
and I have already spoken to him about you .
We shall see whether he can not attach you to himself or find a place for you somewhere nearer the sun . "
Prince Andrew always became specially keen when he had to guide a young man and help him to worldly success .
Under cover of obtaining help of this kind for another , which from pride he would never accept for himself , he kept in touch with the circle which confers success and which attracted him .
He very readily took up Bor'is ' cause and went with him to Dolgor'ukov .
It was late in the evening when they entered the palace at Olm"utz occupied by the Emperors and their retinues .
That same day a council of war had been held in which all the members of the Hofkriegsrath and both Emperors took part .
At that council , contrary to the views of the old generals Kut'uzov and Prince Schwartzenberg , it had been decided to advance immediately and give battle to Bonaparte .
The council of war was just over when Prince Andrew accompanied by Bor'is arrived at the palace to find Dolgor'ukov .
Everyone at headquarters was still under the spell of the day 's council , at which the party of the young had triumphed .
All the advantages were on our side .
Our enormous forces , undoubtedly superior to Napoleon 's , were concentrated in one place , the troops inspired by the Emperors ' presence were eager for action .
Dolgor'ukov , one of the warmest advocates of an attack , had just returned from the council , tired and exhausted but eager and proud of the victory that had been gained .
" Ah , my dear fellow , what a battle we have gained !
God grant that the one that will result from it will be as victorious !
However , dear fellow , " he said abruptly and eagerly , " I must confess to having been unjust to the Austrians and especially to Weyrother .
What exactitude , what minuteness , what knowledge of the locality , what foresight for every eventuality , every possibility even to the smallest detail !
No , my dear fellow , no conditions better than our present ones could have been devised .
This combination of Austrian precision with Russian valor - what more could be wished for ? "
" So the attack is definitely resolved on ? " asked Bolk'onski .
" And do you know , my dear fellow , it seems to me that Bonaparte has decidedly lost bearings , you know that a letter was received from him today for the Emperor . "
Dolgor'ukov smiled significantly .
" Is that so ?
And what did he say ?
" inquired Bolk'onski .
" What can he say ?
Tra - di - ri - di - ra and so on ... merely to gain time .
I tell you he is in our hands ,
that 's certain !
But what was most amusing , " he continued , with a sudden , good - natured laugh , " was that we could not think how to address the reply !
If not as ' Consul ' and of course not as ' Emperor , ' it seemed to me it should be to ' General Bonaparte . ' "
" But between not recognizing him as Emperor and calling him General Bonaparte , there is a difference , " remarked Bolk'onski .
" That 's just it , " interrupted Dolgor'ukov quickly , laughing .
" You know Bil'ibin - he 's a very clever fellow .
He suggested addressing him as ' Usurper and Enemy of Mankind . ' "
Dolgor'ukov laughed merrily .
" Only that ? " said Bolk'onski .
" All the same , it was Bil'ibin who found a suitable form for the address .
He is a wise and clever fellow . "
" What was it ? "
" To the Head of the French Government ...
Au chef du gouvernement francais , " said Dolgor'ukov , with grave satisfaction .
" Good , was n't it ? "
" Yes , but he will dislike it extremely , " said Bolk'onski .
" Oh yes , very much !
Do you know the tale about him and Count Mark'ov ?
Count Mark'ov was the only man who knew how to handle him .
You know the story of the handkerchief ?
It is delightful ! "
" Delightful ! " said Bolk'onski . "
But I have come to you , Prince , as a petitioner on behalf of this young man .
You see ... " but before Prince Andrew could finish , an aide - de - camp came in to summon Dolgor'ukov to the Emperor .
" Oh , what a nuisance , " said Dolgor'ukov , getting up hurriedly and pressing the hands of Prince Andrew and Bor'is . "
You know I should be very glad to do all in my power both for you and for this dear young man . "
Again he pressed the hand of the latter with an expression of good - natured , sincere , and animated levity . "
But you see ... another time ! "
Bor'is was excited by the thought of being so close to the higher powers as he felt himself to be at that moment .
He was conscious that here he was in contact with the springs that set in motion the enormous movements of the mass of which in his regiment he felt himself a tiny , obedient , and insignificant atom .
This short man nodded to Dolgor'ukov as to an intimate friend and stared at Prince Andrew with cool intensity , walking straight toward him and evidently expecting him to bow or to step out of his way .
Prince Andrew did neither : a look of animosity appeared on his face and the other turned away and went down the side of the corridor .
" Who was that ? " asked Bor'is .
" He is one of the most remarkable , but to me most unpleasant of men - the Minister of Foreign Affairs , Prince Adam Czartor'yski ....
It is such men as he who decide the fate of nations , " added Bolk'onski with a sigh he could not suppress , as they passed out of the palace .
Next day , the army began its campaign , and up to the very battle of Austerlitz , Bor'is was unable to see either Prince Andrew or Dolgor'ukov again and remained for a while with the Ism'aylov regiment .
CHAPTER X
Rost'ov saw the Cossacks and then the first and second squadrons of hussars and infantry battalions and artillery pass by and go forward and then Generals Bagrati'on and Dolgor'ukov ride past with their adjutants .
All the fear before action which he had experienced as previously , all the inner struggle to conquer that fear , all his dreams of distinguishing himself as a true hussar in this battle , had been wasted .
Their squadron remained in reserve and Nicholas Rost'ov spent that day in a dull and wretched mood .
Evidently the affair was over and , though not big , had been a successful engagement .
The men and officers returning spoke of a brilliant victory , of the occupation of the town of Wischau and the capture of a whole French squadron .
And Nicholas , who had vainly suffered all the dread that precedes a battle and had spent that happy day in inactivity , was all the more depressed .
" Come here , Wost'ov .
Let 's dwink to dwown our gwief ! " shouted Den'isov , who had settled down by the roadside with a flask and some food .
The officers gathered round Den'isov 's canteen , eating and talking .
" There ! They are bringing another ! "
cried one of the officers , indicating a captive French dragoon who was being brought in on foot by two Cossacks .
One of them was leading by the bridle a fine large French horse he had taken from the prisoner .
" Sell us that horse ! "
Den'isov called out to the Cossacks .
" If you like , your honor ! "
The officers got up and stood round the Cossacks and their prisoner .
The French dragoon was a young Alsatian who spoke French with a German accent .
He was breathless with agitation , his face was red , and when he heard some French spoken he at once began speaking to the officers , addressing first one , then another .
He said he would not have been taken , it was not his fault but the corporal 's who had sent him to seize some horsecloths , though he had told him the Russians were there .
And at every word he added : " But do n't hurt my little horse ! " and stroked the animal .
It was plain that he did not quite grasp where he was .
Now he excused himself for having been taken prisoner and now , imagining himself before his own officers , insisted on his soldierly discipline and zeal in the service .
He brought with him into our rearguard all the freshness of atmosphere of the French army , which was so alien to us .
The Cossacks sold the horse for two gold pieces , and Rost'ov , being the richest of the officers now that he had received his money , bought it .
" But do n't hurt my little horse ! " said the Alsatian good - naturedly to Rost'ov when the animal was handed over to the hussar .
Rost'ov smilingly reassured the dragoon and gave him money .
" Alley !
Alley ! " said the Cossack , touching the prisoner 's arm to make him go on .
" The Emperor !
The Emperor ! " was suddenly heard among the hussars .
All began to run and bustle , and Rost'ov saw coming up the road behind him several riders with white plumes in their hats .
In a moment everyone was in his place , waiting .
Rost'ov did not know or remember how he ran to his place and mounted .
Instantly his regret at not having been in action and his dejected mood amid people of whom he was weary had gone , instantly every thought of himself had vanished .
He was filled with happiness at his nearness to the Emperor .
He felt that this nearness by itself made up to him for the day he had lost .
He was happy as a lover when the longed - for moment of meeting arrives .
Not daring to look round and without looking round , he was ecstatically conscious of his approach .
He felt it not only from the sound of the hoofs of the approaching cavalcade , but because as he drew near everything grew brighter , more joyful , more significant , and more festive around him .
And as if in accord with Rost'ov 's feeling , there was a deathly stillness amid which was heard the Emperor 's voice .
" The P'avlograd hussars ? " he inquired .
" The reserves , sire ! " replied a voice , a very human one compared to that which had said : " The P'avlograd hussars ? "
The Emperor drew level with Rost'ov and halted .
Alexander 's face was even more beautiful than it had been three days before at the review .
It shone with such gaiety and youth , such innocent youth , that it suggested the liveliness of a fourteen - year - old boy , and yet it was the face of the majestic Emperor .
Casually , while surveying the squadron , the Emperor 's eyes met Rost'ov 's and rested on them for not more than two seconds .
A gentle , mild light poured from them .
Then all at once he raised his eyebrows , abruptly touched his horse with his left foot , and galloped on .
Before he came up with the hussars , several adjutants met him with news of the successful result of the action .
A few minutes after the Emperor had passed , the P'avlograd division was ordered to advance .
In Wischau itself , a petty German town , Rost'ov saw the Emperor again .
In the market place , where there had been some rather heavy firing before the Emperor 's arrival , lay several killed and wounded soldiers whom there had not been time to move .
The wounded soldier was so dirty , coarse , and revolting that his proximity to the Emperor shocked Rost'ov .
An adjutant , dismounting , lifted the soldier under the arms to place him on a stretcher that had been brought .
The soldier groaned .
" Gently , gently !
Ca n't you do it more gently ? "
said the Emperor apparently suffering more than the dying soldier , and he rode away .
Rost'ov saw tears filling the Emperor 's eyes and heard him , as he was riding away , say to Czartor'yski : " What a terrible thing war is : what a terrible thing !
Quelle terrible chose que la guerre ! "
The troops of the vanguard were stationed before Wischau , within sight of the enemy 's lines , which all day long had yielded ground to us at the least firing .
The Emperor 's gratitude was announced to the vanguard , rewards were promised , and the men received a double ration of vodka .
The campfires crackled and the soldiers ' songs resounded even more merrily than on the previous night .
Den'isov celebrated his promotion to the rank of major , and Rost'ov , who had already drunk enough , at the end of the feast proposed the Emperor 's health . "
Not ' our Sovereign , the Emperor , ' as they say at official dinners , " said he , " but the health of our Sovereign , that good , enchanting , and great man !
Let us drink to his health and to the certain defeat of the French ! "
" If we fought before , " he said , " not letting the French pass , as at Sch"on Grabern , what shall we not do now when he is at the front ?
We will all die for him gladly !
Is it not so , gentlemen ?
Perhaps I am not saying it right
, I have drunk a good deal - but that is how I feel , and so do you too !
To the health of Alexander the First !
Hurrah ! "
" Hurrah ! " rang the enthusiastic voices of the officers .
And the old cavalry captain , K'irsten , shouted enthusiastically and no less sincerely than the twenty - year - old Rost'ov .
" Lads ! here 's to our Sovereign , the Emperor , and victory over our enemies !
Hurrah ! "
he exclaimed in his dashing , old , hussar 's baritone .
The hussars crowded round and responded heartily with loud shouts .
Late that night , when all had separated , Den'isov with his short hand patted his favorite , Rost'ov , on the shoulder .
" As there 's no one to fall in love with on campaign , he 's fallen in love with the Tsar , " he said .
" Den'isov , do n't make fun of it ! " cried Rost'ov .
" It is such a lofty , beautiful feeling , such a ... "
" I believe it , I believe it , fwiend , and I share and appwove ... "
" No , you do n't understand ! "
He really was in love with the Tsar and the glory of the Russian arms and the hope of future triumph .
And he was not the only man to experience that feeling during those memorable days preceding the battle of Austerlitz :
nine tenths of the men in the Russian army were then in love , though less ecstatically , with their Tsar and the glory of the Russian arms .
CHAPTER XI
The next day the Emperor stopped at Wischau , and Villier , his physician , was repeatedly summoned to see him .
At headquarters and among the troops near by the news spread that the Emperor was unwell .
He ate nothing and had slept badly that night , those around him reported .
The cause of this indisposition was the strong impression made on his sensitive mind by the sight of the killed and wounded .
At daybreak on the seventeenth , a French officer who had come with a flag of truce , demanding an audience with the Russian Emperor , was brought into Wischau from our outposts .
This officer was Savary .
The Emperor had only just fallen asleep and so Savary had to wait .
At midday he was admitted to the Emperor , and an hour later he rode off with Prince Dolgor'ukov to the advanced post of the French army .
It was rumored that Savary had been sent to propose to Alexander a meeting with Napoleon .
Toward evening Dolgor'ukov came back , went straight to the Tsar , and remained alone with him for a long time .
On the eighteenth and nineteenth of November , the army advanced two days ' march and the enemy 's outposts after a brief interchange of shots retreated .
In the highest army circles from midday on the nineteenth , a great , excitedly bustling activity began which lasted till the morning of the twentieth , when the memorable battle of Austerlitz was fought .
Till midday on the nineteenth , the activity - the eager talk , running to and fro , and dispatching of adjutants - was confined to the Emperor 's headquarters .
But on the afternoon of that day , this activity reached Kut'uzov 's headquarters and the staffs of the commanders of columns .
The concentrated activity which had begun at the Emperor 's headquarters in the morning and had started the whole movement that followed was like the first movement of the main wheel of a large tower clock .
Prince Andrew was on duty that day and in constant attendance on the commander in chief .
At six in the evening , Kut'uzov went to the Emperor 's headquarters and after staying but a short time with the Tsar went to see the grand marshal of the court , Count Tolst'oy .
Bolk'onski took the opportunity to go in to get some details of the coming action from Dolgor'ukov .
" Well , how d'you do , my dear fellow
? " said Dolgor'ukov , who was sitting at tea with Bil'ibin .
" The fete is for tomorrow .
How is your old fellow ?
Out of sorts ? "
" I wo n't say he is out of sorts , but I fancy he would like to be heard . "
" Yes , you have seen him ? " said Prince Andrew .
" Well , what is Bonaparte like ?
How did he impress you ? "
If he were n't afraid of a battle why did he ask for that interview ?
Why negotiate , and above all why retreat , when to retreat is so contrary to his method of conducting war ?
Believe me , he is afraid , afraid of a general battle .
His hour has come !
Mark my words ! "
" But tell me , what is he like , eh ? " said Prince Andrew again .
" He is a man in a gray overcoat , very anxious that I should call him ' Your Majesty , ' but who , to his chagrin , got no title from me !
That 's the sort of man he is , and nothing more , " replied Dolgor'ukov , looking round at Bil'ibin with a smile .
No , we must n't forget Suv'orov and his rule - not to put yourself in a position to be attacked , but yourself to attack .
Believe me in war the energy of young men often shows the way better than all the experience of old Cunctators . "
" But in what position are we going to attack him ?
I have been at the outposts today and it is impossible to say where his chief forces are situated , " said Prince Andrew .
He wished to explain to Dolgor'ukov a plan of attack he had himself formed .
" Oh , that is all the same , " Dolgor'ukov said quickly , and getting up he spread a map on the table . "
All eventualities have been foreseen .
If he is standing before Br"unn ... "
And Prince Dolgor'ukov rapidly but indistinctly explained Weyrother 's plan of a flanking movement .
Prince Andrew began to reply and to state his own plan , which might have been as good as Weyrother 's , but for the disadvantage that Weyrother 's had already been approved .
" There will be a council of war at Kut'uzov 's tonight , though ; you can say all this there , " remarked Dolgor'ukov .
" I will do so , " said Prince Andrew , moving away from the map .
" Whatever are you bothering about , gentlemen ? " said Bil'ibin , who , till then , had listened with an amused smile to their conversation and now was evidently ready with a joke . "
Whether tomorrow brings victory or defeat , the glory of our Russian arms is secure .
Except your Kut'uzov , there is not a single Russian in command of a column !
The commanders are : Herr General Wimpfen , le Comte de Langeron , le Prince de Lichtenstein , le Prince , de Hohenlohe , and finally Prishprish , and so on like all those Polish names . "
" Be quiet , backbiter ! " said Dolgor'ukov .
" It is not true ; there are now two Russians , Milor'adovich , and Dokht'urov , and there would be a third , Count Arakch'eev , if his nerves were not too weak . "
" However , I think General Kut'uzov has come out , " said Prince Andrew .
" I wish you good luck and success , gentlemen ! "
he added and went out after shaking hands with Dolgor'ukov and Bil'ibin .
On the way home , Prince Andrew could not refrain from asking Kut'uzov , who was sitting silently beside him , what he thought of tomorrow 's battle .
Kut'uzov looked sternly at his adjutant and , after a pause , replied : " I think the battle will be lost , and so I told Count Tolst'oy and asked him to tell the Emperor .
What do you think he replied ? '
But , my dear general , I am engaged with rice and cutlets , look after military matters yourself ! '
Yes ...
That was the answer I got ! "
CHAPTER XII
Shortly after nine o'clock that evening , Weyrother drove with his plans to Kut'uzov 's quarters where the council of war was to be held .
All the commanders of columns were summoned to the commander in chief 's and with the exception of Prince Bagrati'on , who declined to come , were all there at the appointed time .
Weyrother evidently felt himself to be at the head of a movement that had already become unrestrainable .
He was like a horse running downhill harnessed to a heavy cart .
Whether he was pulling it or being pushed by it he did not know , but rushed along at headlong speed with no time to consider what this movement might lead to .
He was evidently so busy that he even forgot to be polite to the commander in chief .
He interrupted him , talked rapidly and indistinctly , without looking at the man he was addressing , and did not reply to questions put to him .
He was bespattered with mud and had a pitiful , weary , and distracted air , though at the same time he was haughty and self - confident .
Kut'uzov was occupying a nobleman 's castle of modest dimensions near Ostralitz .
In the large drawing room which had become the commander in chief 's office were gathered Kut'uzov himself , Weyrother , and the members of the council of war .
They were drinking tea , and only awaited Prince Bagrati'on to begin the council .
At last Bagrati'on 's orderly came with the news that the prince could not attend .
Prince Andrew came in to inform the commander in chief of this and , availing himself of permission previously given him by Kut'uzov to be present at the council , he remained in the room .
Kut'uzov , with his uniform unbuttoned so that his fat neck bulged over his collar as if escaping , was sitting almost asleep in a low chair , with his podgy old hands resting symmetrically on its arms .
At the sound of Weyrother 's voice , he opened his one eye with an effort .
" Yes , yes , if you please !
It is already late , " said he , and nodding his head
he let it droop and again closed his eye .
He really was asleep .
" Dispositions for an attack on the enemy position behind Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz , November 30 , 1805 . "
The dispositions were very complicated and difficult .
They began as follows :
For this object it is necessary that ...
The first column marches ...
The second column marches ...
The third column marches ... "
and so on , read Weyrother .
The generals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficult dispositions .
The tall , fair - haired General Buxh"owden stood , leaning his back against the wall , his eyes fixed on a burning candle , and seemed not to listen or even to wish to be thought to listen .
He remained stubbornly silent , gazing at Weyrother 's face , and only turned away his eyes when the Austrian chief of staff finished reading .
Then Milor'adovich looked round significantly at the other generals .
But one could not tell from that significant look whether he agreed or disagreed and was satisfied or not with the arrangements .
" A geography lesson !
" he muttered as if to himself , but loud enough to be heard .
Przebysz'ewski , with respectful but dignified politeness , held his hand to his ear toward Weyrother , with the air of a man absorbed in attention .
Dohkt'urov , a little man , sat opposite Weyrother , with an assiduous and modest mien , and stooping over the outspread map conscientiously studied the dispositions and the unfamiliar locality .
He asked Weyrother several times to repeat words he had not clearly heard and the difficult names of villages .
Weyrother complied and Dohkt'urov noted them down .
When the monotonous sound of Weyrother 's voice ceased , Kut'uzov opened his eye as a miller wakes up when the soporific drone of the mill wheel is interrupted .
He listened to what Langeron said , as if remarking , " So you are still at that silly business ! "
quickly closed his eye again , and let his head sink still lower .
Weyrother met all objections with a firm and contemptuous smile , evidently prepared beforehand to meet all objections be they what they might .
" If he could attack us , he would have done so today , " said he .
" So you think he is powerless ? " said Langeron .
" He has forty thousand men at most , " replied Weyrother , with the smile of a doctor to whom an old wife wishes to explain the treatment of a case .
" In that case he is inviting his doom by awaiting our attack , " said Langeron , with a subtly ironical smile , again glancing round for support to Milor'adovich who was near him .
But Milor'adovich was at that moment evidently thinking of anything rather than of what the generals were disputing about .
" Ma foi ! " said he , " tomorrow we shall see all that on the battlefield . "
" The enemy has quenched his fires and a continual noise is heard from his camp , " said he .
" What does that mean ?
Either he is retreating , which is the only thing we need fear , or he is changing his position . "
( He smiled ironically . )
" But even if he also took up a position in the Thuerassa , he merely saves us a great deal of trouble and all our arrangements to the minutest detail remain the same . "
" How is that ? ... " began Prince Andrew , who had for long been waiting an opportunity to express his doubts .
Kut'uzov here woke up , coughed heavily , and looked round at the generals .
" Gentlemen , the dispositions for tomorrow - or rather for today , for it is past midnight - cannot now be altered , " said he .
" You have heard them , and we shall all do our duty .
But before a battle , there is nothing more important ... " he paused , " than to have a good sleep . "
He moved as if to rise .
The generals bowed and retired .
It was past midnight .
Prince Andrew went out .
The council of war , at which Prince Andrew had not been able to express his opinion as he had hoped to , left on him a vague and uneasy impression .
Whether Dolgor'ukov and Weyrother , or Kut'uzov , Langeron , and the others who did not approve of the plan of attack , were right - he did not know . "
But was it really not possible for Kut'uzov to state his views plainly to the Emperor ?
Is it possible that on account of court and personal considerations tens of thousands of lives , and my life , my life , " he thought , " must be risked ? "
" Yes , it is very likely that I shall be killed tomorrow , " he thought .
The night was foggy and through the fog the moonlight gleamed mysteriously . "
Yes , tomorrow , tomorrow !
" he thought . "
Tomorrow everything may be over for me !
All these memories will be no more , none of them will have any meaning for me .
Tomorrow perhaps , even certainly , I have a presentiment that for the first time I shall have to show all I can do . "
And his fancy pictured the battle , its loss , the concentration of fighting at one point , and the hesitation of all the commanders .
And then that happy moment , that Toulon for which he had so long waited , presents itself to him at last .
He firmly and clearly expresses his opinion to Kut'uzov , to Weyrother , and to the Emperors .
But death and suffering ? " suggested another voice .
Prince Andrew , however , did not answer that voice and went on dreaming of his triumphs .
The dispositions for the next battle are planned by him alone .
Nominally he is only an adjutant on Kut'uzov 's staff , but he does everything alone .
The next battle is won by him alone .
Kut'uzov is removed and he is appointed ... "
Well and then ? " asked the other voice .
"
If before that you are not ten times wounded , killed , or betrayed , well ... what then ? ... "
Yes , for that alone !
I shall never tell anyone , but , oh God !
what am I to do if I love nothing but fame and men 's esteem ?
Death , wounds , the loss of family -
I fear nothing .
The voices were those of the orderlies who were packing up ; one voice , probably a coachman 's , was teasing Kut'uzov 's old cook whom Prince Andrew knew , and who was called Tit .
He was saying , " Tit , I say , Tit ! "
" Well ? " returned the old man .
" Go , Tit , thresh a bit ! " said the wag .
" Oh , go to the devil ! " called out a voice , drowned by the laughter of the orderlies and servants .
" All the same , I love and value nothing but triumph over them all , I value this mystic power and glory that is floating here above me in this mist ! "
CHAPTER XIII
That same night , Rost'ov was with a platoon on skirmishing duty in front of Bagrati'on 's detachment .
His hussars were placed along the line in couples and he himself rode along the line trying to master the sleepiness that kept coming over him .
An enormous space , with our army 's campfires dimly glowing in the fog , could be seen behind him ; in front of him was misty darkness .
Rost'ov could see nothing , peer as he would into that foggy distance :
now something gleamed gray , now there was something black , now little lights seemed to glimmer where the enemy ought to be ,
now he fancied it was only something in his own eyes .
" Why not ? ...
There are many stories of his getting to know an officer in just such a chance way and attaching him to himself !
What if he gave me a place near him ?
Oh , how I would guard him , how I would tell him the truth , how I would unmask his deceivers ! "
Suddenly a distant shout aroused him .
He started and opened his eyes .
" Where am I ?
Oh yes , in the skirmishing line ... pass and watchword - shaft , Olm"utz .
What a nuisance that our squadron will be in reserve tomorrow , " he thought .
" I 'll ask leave to go to the front , this may be my only chance of seeing the Emperor .
It wo n't be long now before I am off duty .
I 'll take another turn and when I get back
I 'll go to the general and ask him . "
He readjusted himself in the saddle and touched up his horse to ride once more round his hussars .
It seemed to him that it was getting lighter .
To the left he saw a sloping descent lit up , and facing it a black knoll that seemed as steep as a wall .
On this knoll there was a white patch that Rost'ov could not at all make out : was it a glade in the wood lit up by the moon , or some unmelted snow , or some white houses ?
He even thought something moved on that white spot . "
I expect it 's snow ...
that spot ... a spot - une tache , " he thought .
" There now ... it 's not a tache ... Nat'asha ... sister , black eyes ...
Na ... tasha ...
( Wo n't she be surprised when I tell her how I 've seen the Emperor ? )
Nat'asha ... take my sabretache ...
"-"Keep to the right , your honor , there are bushes here , " came the voice of an hussar , past whom Rost'ov was riding in the act of falling asleep .
Rost'ov lifted his head that had sunk almost to his horse 's mane and pulled up beside the hussar .
He was succumbing to irresistible , youthful , childish drowsiness . "
But what was I thinking ?
I must n't forget .
How shall I speak to the Emperor ?
No , that 's not it - that 's tomorrow .
Oh yes ! Nat'asha ... sabretache
... saber them ...
Whom ?
The hussars ...
Ah , the hussars with mustaches .
Along the Tversk'aya Street rode the hussar with mustaches ...
I thought about him too , just opposite G'uryev 's house ...
Old G'uryev ....
Oh , but Den'isov 's a fine fellow .
But that 's all nonsense .
The chief thing is that the Emperor is here .
How he looked at me and wished to say something , but dared not ....
No , it was I who dared not .
But that 's nonsense , the chief thing is not to forget the important thing I was thinking of .
Yes , Na - t'asha , sabretache , oh , yes , yes !
That 's right ! "
And his head once more sank to his horse 's neck .
All at once it seemed to him that he was being fired at . "
What ?
What ?
What ? ...
Cut them down !
What ? ... " said Rost'ov , waking up .
At the moment he opened his eyes he heard in front of him , where the enemy was , the long - drawn shouts of thousands of voices .
His horse and the horse of the hussar near him pricked their ears at these shouts .
Rost'ov could hear the sound of French words but could not distinguish them .
The din of many voices was too great ; all he could hear was : " ahahah ! " and " rrrr ! "
" What 's that ?
What do you make of it ? " said Rost'ov to the hussar beside him .
" That must be the enemy 's camp ! "
The hussar did not reply .
" Why , do n't you hear it ? "
Rost'ov asked again , after waiting for a reply .
" Who can tell , your honor ? " replied the hussar reluctantly .
" From the direction , it must be the enemy , " repeated Rost'ov .
" It may be he or it may be nothing , " muttered the hussar .
" It 's dark ...
Steady ! "
he cried to his fidgeting horse .
Rost'ov 's horse was also getting restive : it pawed the frozen ground , pricking its ears at the noise and looking at the lights .
The shouting grew still louder and merged into a general roar that only an army of several thousand men could produce .
The lights spread farther and farther , probably along the line of the French camp .
Rost'ov no longer wanted to sleep .
The gay triumphant shouting of the enemy army had a stimulating effect on him . "
Vive l'Empereur !
l'Empereur !
" he now heard distinctly .
" They ca n't be far off , probably just beyond the stream , " he said to the hussar beside him .
The hussar only sighed without replying and coughed angrily .
The sound of horse 's hoofs approaching at a trot along the line of hussars was heard , and out of the foggy darkness the figure of a sergeant of hussars suddenly appeared , looming huge as an elephant .
" Your honor , the generals ! " said the sergeant , riding up to Rost'ov .
Rost'ov , still looking round toward the fires and the shouts , rode with the sergeant to meet some mounted men who were riding along the line .
One was on a white horse .
Prince Bagrati'on and Prince Dolgor'ukov with their adjutants had come to witness the curious phenomenon of the lights and shouts in the enemy 's camp .
Rost'ov rode up to Bagrati'on , reported to him , and then joined the adjutants listening to what the generals were saying .
" Believe me , " said Prince Dolgor'ukov , addressing Bagrati'on , " it is nothing but a trick !
He has retreated and ordered the rearguard to kindle fires and make a noise to deceive us . "
" Hardly , " said Bagrati'on .
" I saw them this evening on that knoll ; if they had retreated they would have withdrawn from that too ....
Officer ! " said Bagrati'on to Rost'ov , " are the enemy 's skirmishers still there ? "
" They were there this evening , but now I do n't know , your excellency .
Shall I go with some of my hussars to see ? "
replied Rost'ov .
Bagrati'on stopped and , before replying , tried to see Rost'ov 's face in the mist .
" Well , go and see , " he said , after a pause .
" Yes , sir . "
Rost'ov spurred his horse , called to Sergeant F'edchenko and two other hussars , told them to follow him , and trotted downhill in the direction from which the shouting came .
He felt both frightened and pleased to be riding alone with three hussars into that mysterious and dangerous misty distance where no one had been before him .
Having descended the hill at a trot , he no longer saw either our own or the enemy 's fires , but heard the shouting of the French more loudly and distinctly .
In the valley he saw before him something like a river , but when he reached it he found it was a road .
Having come out onto the road he reined in his horse , hesitating whether to ride along it or cross it and ride over the black field up the hillside .
To keep to the road which gleamed white in the mist would have been safer because it would be easier to see people coming along it . "
Follow me ! "
said he , crossed the road , and began riding up the hill at a gallop toward the point where the French pickets had been standing that evening .
" Your honor , there he is ! " cried one of the hussars behind him .
Another musket missed fire but flashed in the pan .
Rost'ov turned his horse and galloped back .
Four more reports followed at intervals , and the bullets passed somewhere in the fog singing in different tones .
Rost'ov reined in his horse , whose spirits had risen , like his own , at the firing , and went back at a footpace . "
Well , some more !
Some more ! "
a merry voice was saying in his soul .
But no more shots came .
Only when approaching Bagrati'on did Rost'ov let his horse gallop again , and with his hand at the salute rode up to the general .
Dolgor'ukov was still insisting that the French had retreated and had only lit fires to deceive us .
" What does that prove ? " he was saying as Rost'ov rode up . "
They might retreat and leave the pickets . "
" It 's plain that they have not all gone yet , Prince , " said Bagrati'on .
" Wait till tomorrow morning , we 'll find out everything tomorrow . "
" Very good , very good , " said Bagrati'on .
" Thank you , officer . "
" Your excellency , " said Rost'ov , " may I ask a favor ? "
" What is it ? "
" Tomorrow our squadron is to be in reserve .
May I ask to be attached to the first squadron ? "
" What 's your name ? "
" Count Rost'ov . "
" Oh , very well , you may stay in attendance on me . "
" Count Ily'a Rost'ov 's son ? " asked Dolgor'ukov .
But Rost'ov did not reply .
" Then I may reckon on it , your excellency ? "
" I will give the order . "
" Tomorrow very likely I may be sent with some message to the Emperor , " thought Rost'ov .
" Thank God ! "
The fires and shouting in the enemy 's army were occasioned by the fact that while Napoleon 's proclamation was being read to the troops the Emperor himself rode round his bivouacs .
The soldiers , on seeing him , lit wisps of straw and ran after him , shouting , " Vive l'Empereur ! "
Napoleon 's proclamation was as follows :
Soldiers !
The Russian army is advancing against you to avenge the Austrian army of Ulm .
They are the same battalions you broke at Hollabr"unn and have pursued ever since to this place .
The position we occupy is a strong one , and while they are marching to go round me on the right they will expose a flank to me .
Soldiers !
I will myself direct your battalions .
Do not break your ranks on the plea of removing the wounded !
Let every man be fully imbued with the thought that we must defeat these hirelings of England , inspired by such hatred of our nation !
NAPOLEON
CHAPTER XIV
At five in the morning it was still quite dark .
The smoke of the campfires , into which they were throwing everything superfluous , made the eyes smart .
It was cold and dark .
Austrian column guides were moving in and out among the Russian troops and served as heralds of the advance .
The officers buttoned up their coats , buckled on their swords and pouches , and moved along the ranks shouting .
The train drivers and orderlies harnessed and packed the wagons and tied on the loads .
The adjutants and battalion and regimental commanders mounted , crossed themselves , gave final instructions , orders , and commissions to the baggage men who remained behind , and the monotonous tramp of thousands of feet resounded .
The column moved forward without knowing where and unable , from the masses around them , the smoke and the increasing fog , to see either the place they were leaving or that to which they were going .
A soldier on the march is hemmed in and borne along by his regiment as much as a sailor is by his ship .
On the day of battle the soldiers excitedly try to get beyond the interests of their regiment , they listen intently , look about , and eagerly ask concerning what is going on around them .
The fog had grown so dense that though it was growing light they could not see ten paces ahead .
Bushes looked like gigantic trees and level ground like cliffs and slopes .
Anywhere , on any side , one might encounter an enemy invisible ten paces off .
But the columns advanced for a long time , always in the same fog , descending and ascending hills , avoiding gardens and enclosures , going over new and unknown ground , and nowhere encountering the enemy .
On the contrary , the soldiers became aware that in front , behind , and on all sides , other Russian columns were moving in the same direction .
Every soldier felt glad to know that to the unknown place where he was going , many more of our men were going too .
" There now , the K'urskies have also gone past , " was being said in the ranks .
" It 's wonderful what a lot of our troops have gathered , lads !
Last night I looked at the campfires and there was no end of them .
A regular Moscow ! "
But when they had marched for about an hour in the dense fog , the greater part of the men had to halt and an unpleasant consciousness of some dislocation and blunder spread through the ranks .
How such a consciousness is communicated is very difficult to define , but it certainly is communicated very surely , and flows rapidly , imperceptibly , and irrepressibly , as water does in a creek .
" Why have we stopped ?
Is the way blocked ?
Or have we already come up against the French ? "
" No , one ca n't hear them .
They 'd be firing if we had . "
" They were in a hurry enough to start us , and now here we stand in the middle of a field without rhyme or reason .
It 's all those damned Germans ' muddling !
What stupid devils ! "
" Yes , I 'd send them on in front , but no fear , they 're crowding up behind .
And now here we stand hungry . "
" I say , shall we soon be clear ?
They say the cavalry are blocking the way , " said an officer .
" Ah , those damned Germans !
They do n't know their own country ! "
said another .
" What division are you ? " shouted an adjutant , riding up .
" The Eighteenth . "
" Then why are you here ?
You should have gone on long ago , now you wo n't get there till evening . "
" What stupid orders !
They do n't themselves know what they are doing ! "
said the officer and rode off .
Then a general rode past shouting something angrily , not in Russian .
" Tafa - lafa !
But what he 's jabbering no one can make out , " said a soldier , mimicking the general who had ridden away .
" I 'd shoot them , the scoundrels ! "
" We were ordered to be at the place before nine , but we have n't got halfway .
Fine orders !
" was being repeated on different sides .
And the feeling of energy with which the troops had started began to turn into vexation and anger at the stupid arrangements and at the Germans .
Several thousand cavalry crossed in front of the infantry , who had to wait .
At the front an altercation occurred between an Austrian guide and a Russian general .
The general shouted a demand that the cavalry should be halted , the Austrian argued that not he , but the higher command , was to blame .
The troops meanwhile stood growing listless and dispirited .
After an hour 's delay they at last moved on , descending the hill .
The fog that was dispersing on the hill lay still more densely below , where they were descending .
In this way the action began for the first , second , and third columns , which had gone down into the valley .
The fourth column , with which Kut'uzov was , stood on the Pratzen Heights .
Below , where the fight was beginning , there was still thick fog ; on the higher ground it was clearing , but nothing could be seen of what was going on in front .
Whether all the enemy forces were , as we supposed , six miles away , or whether they were near by in that sea of mist , no one knew till after eight o'clock .
It was nine o'clock in the morning .
The fog lay unbroken like a sea down below , but higher up at the village of Schlappanitz where Napoleon stood with his marshals around him , it was quite light .
Above him was a clear blue sky , and the sun 's vast orb quivered like a huge hollow , crimson float on the surface of that milky sea of mist .
Napoleon , in the blue cloak which he had worn on his Italian campaign , sat on his small gray Arab horse a little in front of his marshals .
He gazed silently at the hills which seemed to rise out of the sea of mist and on which the Russian troops were moving in the distance , and he listened to the sounds of firing in the valley .
Not a single muscle of his face - which in those days was still thin - moved .
His gleaming eyes were fixed intently on one spot .
His predictions were being justified .
Part of the Russian force had already descended into the valley toward the ponds and lakes and part were leaving these Pratzen Heights which he intended to attack and regarded as the key to the position .
But still he did not begin the engagement .
Today was a great day for him - the anniversary of his coronation .
The marshals stood behind him not venturing to distract his attention .
He looked now at the Pratzen Heights , now at the sun floating up out of the mist .
CHAPTER XV
He greeted the men of the foremost regiment and gave them the order to march , thereby indicating that he intended to lead that column himself .
When he had reached the village of Pratzen he halted .
Prince Andrew was behind , among the immense number forming the commander in chief 's suite .
He was in a state of suppressed excitement and irritation , though controlledly calm as a man is at the approach of a long - awaited moment .
He was firmly convinced that this was the day of his Toulon , or his bridge of Arcola .
How it would come about he did not know , but he felt sure it would do so .
The locality and the position of our troops were known to him as far as they could be known to anyone in our army .
His own strategic plan , which obviously could not now be carried out , was forgotten .
Now , entering into Weyrother 's plan , Prince Andrew considered possible contingencies and formed new projects such as might call for his rapidity of perception and decision .
To the left down below in the mist , the musketry fire of unseen forces could be heard .
It was there Prince Andrew thought the fight would concentrate . "
He could not look calmly at the standards of the passing battalions .
Seeing them he kept thinking , " That may be the very standard with which I shall lead the army . "
In the morning all that was left of the night mist on the heights was a hoar frost now turning to dew , but in the valleys it still lay like a milk - white sea .
Nothing was visible in the valley to the left into which our troops had descended and from whence came the sounds of firing .
Above the heights was the dark clear sky , and to the right the vast orb of the sun .
In front , far off on the farther shore of that sea of mist , some wooded hills were discernible , and it was there the enemy probably was , for something could be descried .
In front and behind moved infantry .
The commander in chief was standing at the end of the village letting the troops pass by him .
That morning Kut'uzov seemed worn and irritable .
The infantry passing before him came to a halt without any command being given , apparently obstructed by something in front .
" Do order them to form into battalion columns and go round the village ! " he said angrily to a general who had ridden up .
" Do n't you understand , your excellency , my dear sir , that you must not defile through narrow village streets when we are marching against the enemy ? "
" I intended to re - form them beyond the village , your excellency , " answered the general .
Kut'uzov laughed bitterly .
" You 'll make a fine thing of it , deploying in sight of the enemy !
Very fine ! "
" The enemy is still far away , your excellency .
According to the dispositions ... "
" The dispositions ! " exclaimed Kut'uzov bitterly . "
Who told you that ? ...
Kindly do as you are ordered . "
" Yes , sir . "
" My dear fellow , " Nesv'itski whispered to Prince Andrew , " the old man is as surly as a dog . "
An Austrian officer in a white uniform with green plumes in his hat galloped up to Kut'uzov and asked in the Emperor 's name had the fourth column advanced into action .
Kut'uzov turned round without answering and his eye happened to fall upon Prince Andrew , who was beside him .
Seeing him , Kut'uzov 's malevolent and caustic expression softened , as if admitting that what was being done was not his adjutant 's fault , and still not answering the Austrian adjutant , he addressed Bolk'onski .
" Go , my dear fellow , and see whether the third division has passed the village .
Tell it to stop and await my orders . "
Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he stopped him .
" And ask whether sharpshooters have been posted , " he added .
" What are they doing ?
What are they doing ?
" he murmured to himself , still not replying to the Austrian .
Prince Andrew galloped off to execute the order .
Overtaking the battalions that continued to advance , he stopped the third division and convinced himself that there really were no sharpshooters in front of our columns .
The colonel at the head of the regiment was much surprised at the commander in chief 's order to throw out skirmishers .
He had felt perfectly sure that there were other troops in front of him and that the enemy must be at least six miles away .
There was really nothing to be seen in front except a barren descent hidden by dense mist .
Having given orders in the commander in chief 's name to rectify this omission , Prince Andrew galloped back .
Kut'uzov
still in the same place , his stout body resting heavily in the saddle with the lassitude of age , sat yawning wearily with closed eyes .
The troops were no longer moving , but stood with the butts of their muskets on the ground .
" All right , all right ! "
he said to Prince Andrew , and turned to a general who , watch in hand , was saying it was time they started as all the left - flank columns had already descended .
" Plenty of time , your excellency , " muttered Kut'uzov in the midst of a yawn . "
Plenty of time , " he repeated .
Just then at a distance behind Kut'uzov was heard the sound of regiments saluting , and this sound rapidly came nearer along the whole extended line of the advancing Russian columns .
Evidently the person they were greeting was riding quickly .
When the soldiers of the regiment in front of which Kut'uzov was standing began to shout , he rode a little to one side and looked round with a frown .
Along the road from Pratzen galloped what looked like a squadron of horsemen in various uniforms .
Two of them rode side by side in front , at full gallop .
One in a black uniform with white plumes in his hat rode a bobtailed chestnut horse , the other who was in a white uniform rode a black one .
These were the two Emperors followed by their suites .
Kut'uzov , affecting the manners of an old soldier at the front , gave the command " Attention ! " and rode up to the Emperors with a salute .
His whole appearance and manner were suddenly transformed .
He put on the air of a subordinate who obeys without reasoning .
With an affectation of respect which evidently struck Alexander unpleasantly , he rode up and saluted .
This unpleasant impression merely flitted over the young and happy face of the Emperor like a cloud of haze across a clear sky and vanished .
At the Olm"utz review he had seemed more majestic ; here he seemed brighter and more energetic .
He was slightly flushed after galloping two miles , and reining in his horse he sighed restfully and looked round at the faces of his suite , young and animated as his own .
The Emperor Francis , a rosy , long faced young man , sat very erect on his handsome black horse , looking about him in a leisurely and preoccupied manner .
In the Emperors ' suite were the picked young orderly officers of the Guard and line regiments , Russian and Austrian .
Among them were grooms leading the Tsar 's beautiful relay horses covered with embroidered cloths .
" Why are n't you beginning , Michael Ilari'onovich ? " said the Emperor Alexander hurriedly to Kut'uzov , glancing courteously at the same time at the Emperor Francis .
" I am waiting , Your Majesty , " answered Kut'uzov , bending forward respectfully .
The Emperor , frowning slightly , bent his ear forward as if he had not quite heard .
" Waiting , Your Majesty , " repeated Kut'uzov .
( Prince Andrew noted that Kut'uzov 's upper lip twitched unnaturally as he said the word " waiting . " )
" Not all the columns have formed up yet , Your Majesty . "
The Tsar heard but obviously did not like the reply ; he shrugged his rather round shoulders and glanced at Novos'iltsev who was near him , as if complaining of Kut'uzov .
But the Emperor Francis continued to look about him and did not listen .
In the Emperor 's suite all exchanged rapid looks that expressed dissatisfaction and reproach . "
Old though he may be , he should not , he certainly should not , speak like that , " their glances seemed to say .
The Tsar looked intently and observantly into Kut'uzov 's eye waiting to hear whether he would say anything more .
But Kut'uzov , with respectfully bowed head , seemed also to be waiting .
The silence lasted for about a minute .
" However , if you command it , Your Majesty , " said Kut'uzov , lifting his head and again assuming his former tone of a dull , unreasoning , but submissive general .
He touched his horse and having called Milor'adovich , the commander of the column , gave him the order to advance .
The troops again began to move , and two battalions of the N'ovgorod and one of the ' Apsheron regiment went forward past the Emperor .
" God be with you , general ! " said the Emperor .
" Ma foi , sire , nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilit'e , sire , " * he answered gaily , raising nevertheless ironic smiles among the gentlemen of the Tsar 's suite by his poor French .
* " Indeed , Sire , we shall do everything it is possible to do , Sire . "
Milor'adovich wheeled his horse sharply and stationed himself a little behind the Emperor .
The ' Apsheron men , excited by the Tsar 's presence , passed in step before the Emperors and their suites at a bold , brisk pace .
Lads , it 's not the first village you 've had to take , " cried he .
" Glad to do our best ! " shouted the soldiers .
The Emperor 's horse started at the sudden cry .
The Emperor turned with a smile to one of his followers and made a remark to him , pointing to the gallant ' Apsherons .
CHAPTER XVI
Kut'uzov accompanied by his adjutants rode at a walking pace behind the carabineers .
When he had gone less than half a mile in the rear of the column he stopped at a solitary , deserted house that had probably once been an inn , where two roads parted .
Both of them led downhill and troops were marching along both .
The fog had begun to clear and enemy troops were already dimly visible about a mile and a half off on the opposite heights .
Down below , on the left , the firing became more distinct .
Kut'uzov had stopped and was speaking to an Austrian general .
Prince Andrew , who was a little behind looking at them , turned to an adjutant to ask him for a field glass .
" Look , look ! " said this adjutant , looking not at the troops in the distance , but down the hill before him .
" It 's the French ! "
The two generals and the adjutant took hold of the field glass , trying to snatch it from one another .
The expression on all their faces suddenly changed to one of horror .
The French were supposed to be a mile and a half away , but had suddenly and unexpectedly appeared just in front of us .
" It 's the enemy ? ...
No ! ...
Yes , see it is ! ...
for certain ....
But how is that ? " said different voices .
With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw below them to the right , not more than five hundred paces from where Kut'uzov was standing , a dense French column coming up to meet the ' Apsherons .
" Here it is !
The decisive moment has arrived .
My turn has come , " thought Prince Andrew , and striking his horse he rode up to Kut'uzov .
" The ' Apsherons must be stopped , your excellency , " cried he .
But at that very instant a cloud of smoke spread all round , firing was heard quite close at hand , and a voice of na"ive terror barely two steps from Prince Andrew shouted , " Brothers !
All 's lost ! "
And at this as if at a command , everyone began to run .
Confused and ever - increasing crowds were running back to where five minutes before the troops had passed the Emperors .
Not only would it have been difficult to stop that crowd , it was even impossible not to be carried back with it oneself .
Bolk'onski only tried not to lose touch with it , and looked around bewildered and unable to grasp what was happening in front of him .
Nesv'itski with an angry face , red and unlike himself , was shouting to Kut'uzov that if he did not ride away at once he would certainly be taken prisoner .
Kut'uzov remained in the same place and without answering drew out a handkerchief .
Blood was flowing from his cheek .
Prince Andrew forced his way to him .
" You are wounded ? " he asked , hardly able to master the trembling of his lower jaw .
" The wound is not here , it is there ! "
said Kut'uzov , pressing the handkerchief to his wounded cheek and pointing to the fleeing soldiers .
" Stop them ! "
he shouted , and at the same moment , probably realizing that it was impossible to stop them , spurred his horse and rode to the right .
A fresh wave of the flying mob caught him and bore him back with it .
The troops were running in such a dense mass that once surrounded by them it was difficult to get out again .
One was shouting , " Get on !
Why are you hindering us ? "
Another in the same place turned round and fired in the air ; a third was striking the horse Kut'uzov himself rode .
Having by a great effort got away to the left from that flood of men , Kut'uzov , with his suite diminished by more than half , rode toward a sound of artillery fire near by .
Higher up stood some Russian infantry , neither moving forward to protect the battery nor backward with the fleeing crowd .
A mounted general separated himself from the infantry and approached Kut'uzov .
Of Kut'uzov 's suite only four remained .
They were all pale and exchanged looks in silence .
" Stop those wretches ! "
The French had attacked the battery and , seeing Kut'uzov , were firing at him .
After this volley the regimental commander clutched at his leg ; several soldiers fell , and a second lieutenant who was holding the flag let it fall from his hands .
It swayed and fell , but caught on the muskets of the nearest soldiers .
The soldiers started firing without orders .
" Oh !
Oh !
Oh ! " groaned Kut'uzov despairingly and looked around ....
" Bolk'onski ! "
he whispered , his voice trembling from a consciousness of the feebleness of age , " Bolk'onski ! "
he whispered , pointing to the disordered battalion and at the enemy , " what 's that ? "
But before he had finished speaking , Prince Andrew , feeling tears of shame and anger choking him , had already leapt from his horse and run to the standard .
" Forward , lads !
" he shouted in a voice piercing as a child 's .
" Here it is ! "
thought he , seizing the staff of the standard and hearing with pleasure the whistle of bullets evidently aimed at him .
Several soldiers fell .
" Hurrah ! " shouted Prince Andrew , and , scarcely able to hold up the heavy standard , he ran forward with full confidence that the whole battalion would follow him .
And really he only ran a few steps alone .
One soldier moved and then another and soon the whole battalion ran forward shouting " Hurrah ! " and overtook him .
A sergeant of the battalion ran up and took the flag that was swaying from its weight in Prince Andrew 's hands , but he was immediately killed .
Prince Andrew again seized the standard and , dragging it by the staff , ran on with the battalion .
In front he saw our artillerymen , some of whom were fighting , while others , having abandoned their guns , were running toward him .
He also saw French infantry soldiers who were seizing the artillery horses and turning the guns round .
Prince Andrew and the battalion were already within twenty paces of the cannon .
He heard the whistle of bullets above him unceasingly and to right and left of him soldiers continually groaned and dropped .
But he did not look at them : he looked only at what was going on in front of him - at the battery .
He now saw clearly the figure of a red - haired gunner with his shako knocked awry , pulling one end of a mop while a French soldier tugged at the other .
He could distinctly see the distraught yet angry expression on the faces of these two men , who evidently did not realize what they were doing .
" What are they about ? " thought Prince Andrew as he gazed at them .
" Why does n't the red - haired gunner run away as he is unarmed ?
Why does n't the Frenchman stab him ?
He will not get away before the Frenchman remembers his bayonet and stabs him .... "
But Prince Andrew did not see how it ended .
It seemed to him as though one of the soldiers near him hit him on the head with the full swing of a bludgeon .
It hurt a little , but the worst of it was that the pain distracted him and prevented his seeing what he had been looking at .
" What 's this ?
Am I falling ?
My legs are giving way , " thought he , and fell on his back .
He opened his eyes , hoping to see how the struggle of the Frenchmen with the gunners ended , whether the red - haired gunner had been killed or not and whether the cannon had been captured or saved .
But he saw nothing .
Above him there was now nothing but the sky - the lofty sky , not clear yet still immeasurably lofty , with gray clouds gliding slowly across it . "
How was it
I did not see that lofty sky before ?
And how happy I am to have found it at last !
Yes !
All is vanity , all falsehood , except that infinite sky .
There is nothing , nothing , but that .
But even it does not exist , there is nothing but quiet and peace .
Thank God ! ... "
CHAPTER XVII
On our right flank commanded by Bagrati'on , at nine o'clock the battle had not yet begun .
Not wishing to agree to Dolgor'ukov 's demand to commence the action , and wishing to avert responsibility from himself , Prince Bagrati'on proposed to Dolgor'ukov to send to inquire of the commander in chief .
Bagrati'on cast his large , expressionless , sleepy eyes round his suite , and the boyish face Rost'ov , breathless with excitement and hope , was the first to catch his eye .
He sent him .
" And if I should meet His Majesty before I meet the commander in chief , your excellency ? " said Rost'ov , with his hand to his cap .
" You can give the message to His Majesty , " said Dolgor'ukov , hurriedly interrupting Bagrati'on .
All his wishes were being fulfilled that morning : there was to be a general engagement in which he was taking part ,
more than that , he was orderly to the bravest general , and still more , he was going with a message to Kut'uzov , perhaps even to the sovereign himself .
The morning was bright , he had a good horse under him , and his heart was full of joy and happiness .
On receiving the order he gave his horse the rein and galloped along the line .
The firing grew louder and louder .
He could see puffs of musketry smoke that seemed to chase one another down the hillsides , and clouds of cannon smoke rolling , spreading , and mingling with one another .
He could also , by the gleam of bayonets visible through the smoke , make out moving masses of infantry and narrow lines of artillery with green caissons .
These sights and sounds had no depressing or intimidating effect on him ; on the contrary , they stimulated his energy and determination .
" Go on !
Go on !
Give it them ! "
he mentally exclaimed at these sounds , and again proceeded to gallop along the line , penetrating farther and farther into the region where the army was already in action .
" How it will be there I do n't know , but all will be well ! " thought Rost'ov .
After passing some Austrian troops he noticed that the next part of the line ( the Guards ) was already in action .
" So much the better !
I shall see it close , " he thought .
He was riding almost along the front line .
A handful of men came galloping toward him .
They were our Uhlans who with disordered ranks were returning from the attack .
Rost'ov got out of their way , involuntarily noticed that one of them was bleeding , and galloped on .
" That is no business of mine , " he thought .
Rost'ov heard the thud of their hoofs and the jingle of their weapons and saw their horses , their figures , and even their faces , more and more distinctly .
They were our Horse Guards , advancing to attack the French cavalry that was coming to meet them .
The Horse Guards were galloping , but still holding in their horses .
Rost'ov could already see their faces and heard the command : " Charge ! " shouted by an officer who was urging his thoroughbred to full speed .
Rost'ov , fearing to be crushed or swept into the attack on the French , galloped along the front as hard as his horse could go , but still was not in time to avoid them .
The last of the Horse Guards , a huge pockmarked fellow , frowned angrily on seeing Rost'ov before him , with whom he would inevitably collide .
This Guardsman would certainly have bowled Rost'ov and his Bedouin over ( Rost'ov felt himself quite tiny and weak compared to these gigantic men and horses )
had it not occurred to Rost'ov to flourish his whip before the eyes of the Guardsman 's horse .
Hardly had the Horse Guards passed Rost'ov before he heard them shout , " Hurrah ! " and looking back saw that their foremost ranks were mixed up with some foreign cavalry with red epaulets , probably French .
He could see nothing more , for immediately afterwards cannon began firing from somewhere and smoke enveloped everything .
At that moment , as the Horse Guards , having passed him , disappeared in the smoke , Rost'ov hesitated whether to gallop after them or to go where he was sent .
This was the brilliant charge of the Horse Guards that amazed the French themselves .
" Why should I envy them ?
My chance is not lost , and maybe I shall see the Emperor immediately ! "
thought Rost'ov and galloped on .
Passing behind one of the lines of a regiment of Foot Guards he heard a voice calling him by name .
" Rost'ov ! "
" What ? " he answered , not recognizing Bor'is .
" I say , we 've been in the front line !
Our regiment attacked ! " said Bor'is with the happy smile seen on the faces of young men who have been under fire for the first time .
Rost'ov stopped .
" Have you ? " he said .
" Well , how did it go ? "
" We drove them back ! " said Bor'is with animation , growing talkative .
" Can you imagine it ? "
Rost'ov without hearing Bor'is to the end spurred his horse .
" Where are you off to ? " asked Bor'is .
" With a message to His Majesty . "
" But that 's the Grand Duke , and I want the commander in chief or the Emperor , " said Rost'ov , and was about to spur his horse .
" Count !
Count ! " shouted Berg who ran up from the other side as eager as Bor'is . "
Count !
I am wounded in my right hand " ( and he showed his bleeding hand with a handkerchief tied round it ) " and I remained at the front .
I held my sword in my left hand , Count .
All our family - the von Bergs - have been knights ! "
He said something more , but Rost'ov did not wait to hear it and rode away .
Suddenly he heard musket fire quite close in front of him and behind our troops , where he could never have expected the enemy to be .
" What can it be ? " he thought .
" The enemy in the rear of our army ?
Impossible ! "
And suddenly he was seized by a panic of fear for himself and for the issue of the whole battle . "
But be that what it may , " he reflected , " there is no riding round it now .
I must look for the commander in chief here , and if all is lost it is for me to perish with the rest . "
The foreboding of evil that had suddenly come over Rost'ov was more and more confirmed the farther he rode into the region behind the village of Pratzen , which was full of troops of all kinds .
" What does it mean ?
What is it ?
Whom are they firing at ?
Who is firing ? "
Rost'ov kept asking as he came up to Russian and Austrian soldiers running in confused crowds across his path .
" The devil knows !
They 've killed everybody !
It 's all up now ! "
he was told in Russian , German , and Czech by the crowd of fugitives who understood what was happening as little as he did .
" Kill the Germans ! " shouted one .
" May the devil take them - the traitors ! "
" Zum Henker diese Russen ! "
* muttered a German .
* " Hang these Russians ! "
Several wounded men passed along the road , and words of abuse , screams , and groans mingled in a general hubbub , then the firing died down .
Rost'ov learned later that Russian and Austrian soldiers had been firing at one another .
" My God !
What does it all mean ? " thought he . "
And here , where at any moment the Emperor may see them ....
But no , these must be only a handful of scoundrels .
It will soon be over , it ca n't be that , it ca n't be !
Only to get past them quicker , quicker ! "
The idea of defeat and flight could not enter Rost'ov 's head .
Though he saw French cannon and French troops on the Pratzen Heights just where he had been ordered to look for the commander in chief , he could not , did not wish to , believe that .
CHAPTER XVIII
Rost'ov had been ordered to look for Kut'uzov and the Emperor near the village of Pratzen .
But neither they nor a single commanding officer were there , only disorganized crowds of troops of various kinds .
He urged on his already weary horse to get quickly past these crowds , but the farther he went the more disorganized they were .
The highroad on which he had come out was thronged with cal`eches , carriages of all sorts , and Russian and Austrian soldiers of all arms , some wounded and some not .
This whole mass droned and jostled in confusion under the dismal influence of cannon balls flying from the French batteries stationed on the Pratzen Heights .
" Where is the Emperor ?
Where is Kut'uzov ? "
Rost'ov kept asking everyone he could stop , but got no answer from anyone .
At last seizing a soldier by his collar he forced him to answer .
" Eh , brother !
They 've all bolted long ago ! "
said the soldier , laughing for some reason and shaking himself free .
Having left that soldier who was evidently drunk , Rost'ov stopped the horse of a batman or groom of some important personage and began to question him .
The man announced that the Tsar had been driven in a carriage at full speed about an hour before along that very road and that he was dangerously wounded .
" It ca n't be ! " said Rost'ov .
" It must have been someone else . "
" I saw him myself , " replied the man with a self - confident smile of derision .
" I ought to know the Emperor by now , after the times I 've seen him in Petersburg .
I saw him just as I see you ....
There he sat in the carriage as pale as anything .
How they made the four black horses fly !
Gracious me , they did rattle past !
It 's time I knew the Imperial horses and Ily'a Iv'anych .
I do n't think Ily'a drives anyone except the Tsar ! "
Rost'ov let go of the horse and was about to ride on , when a wounded officer passing by addressed him :
" Who is it you want ?
" he asked . "
The commander in chief ?
He was killed by a cannon ball - struck in the breast before our regiment . "
" Not killed - wounded ! "
another officer corrected him .
" Who ? Kut'uzov ? " asked Rost'ov .
" Not Kut'uzov , but what 's his name - well , never mind ... there are not many left alive .
Go that way , to that village , all the commanders are there , " said the officer , pointing to the village of Hosjeradek , and he walked on .
Rost'ov rode on at a footpace not knowing why or to whom he was now going .
The Emperor was wounded , the battle lost .
It was impossible to doubt it now .
Rost'ov rode in the direction pointed out to him , in which he saw turrets and a church .
What need to hurry ?
What was he now to say to the Tsar or to Kut'uzov , even if they were alive and unwounded ?
" Take this road , your honor , that way you will be killed at once ! " a soldier shouted to him .
" They 'd kill you there ! "
" Oh , what are you talking about ? " said another .
" Where is he to go ?
That way is nearer . "
Rost'ov considered , and then went in the direction where they said he would be killed .
" It 's all the same now .
If the Emperor is wounded , am I to try to save myself ? "
he thought .
He rode on to the region where the greatest number of men had perished in fleeing from Pratzen .
The French had not yet occupied that region , and the Russians - the uninjured and slightly wounded - had left it long ago .
All about the field , like heaps of manure on well - kept plowland , lay from ten to fifteen dead and wounded to each couple of acres .
The wounded crept together in twos and threes and one could hear their distressing screams and groans , sometimes feigned - or so it seemed to Rost'ov .
The sensation of those terrible whistling sounds and of the corpses around him merged in Rost'ov 's mind into a single feeling of terror and pity for himself .
He remembered his mother 's last letter .
" What would she feel , " thought he , " if she saw me here now on this field with the cannon aimed at me ? "
In the village of Hosjeradek there were Russian troops retiring from the field of battle , who though still in some confusion were less disordered .
The French cannon did not reach there and the musketry fire sounded far away .
Here everyone clearly saw and said that the battle was lost .
No one whom Rost'ov asked could tell him where the Emperor or Kut'uzov was .
One officer told Rost'ov that he had seen someone from headquarters behind the village to the left , and thither Rost'ov rode , not hoping to find anyone but merely to ease his conscience .
When he had ridden about two miles and had passed the last of the Russian troops , he saw , near a kitchen garden with a ditch round it , two men on horseback facing the ditch .
Only a little earth crumbled from the bank under the horse 's hind hoofs .
Turning the horse sharply , he again jumped the ditch , and deferentially addressed the horseman with the white plumes , evidently suggesting that he should do the same .
The rider , whose figure seemed familiar to Rost'ov and involuntarily riveted his attention , made a gesture of refusal with his head and hand and by that gesture Rost'ov instantly recognized his lamented and adored monarch .
" But it ca n't be he , alone in the midst of this empty field ! " thought Rost'ov .
At that moment Alexander turned his head and Rost'ov saw the beloved features that were so deeply engraved on his memory .
The Emperor was pale , his cheeks sunken and his eyes hollow , but the charm , the mildness of his features , was all the greater .
Rost'ov was happy in the assurance that the rumors about the Emperor being wounded were false .
He was happy to be seeing him .
He knew that he might and even ought to go straight to him and give the message Dolgor'ukov had ordered him to deliver .
" What !
It is as if I were glad of a chance to take advantage of his being alone and despondent !
Not one of the innumerable speeches addressed to the Emperor that he had composed in his imagination could he now recall .
" Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his instructions for the right flank now that it is nearly four o'clock and the battle is lost ?
No , certainly I must not approach him , I must not intrude on his reflections .
The Emperor , wishing to rest and feeling unwell , sat down under an apple tree and von Toll remained beside him .
Rost'ov from a distance saw with envy and remorse how von Toll spoke long and warmly to the Emperor and how the Emperor , evidently weeping , covered his eyes with his hand and pressed von Toll 's hand .
" And I might have been in his place ! "
thought Rost'ov , and hardly restraining his tears of pity for the Emperor , he rode on in utter despair , not knowing where to or why he was now riding .
His despair was all the greater from feeling that his own weakness was the cause of his grief .
He might ... not only might but should , have gone up to the sovereign .
It was a unique chance to show his devotion to the Emperor and he had not made use of it ....
" What have I done ? " thought he .
And he turned round and galloped back to the place where he had seen the Emperor , but there was no one beyond the ditch now .
Only some carts and carriages were passing by .
From one of the drivers he learned that Kut'uzov 's staff were not far off , in the village the vehicles were going to .
Rost'ov followed them .
In front of him walked Kut'uzov 's groom leading horses in horsecloths .
Then came a cart , and behind that walked an old , bandy - legged domestic serf in a peaked cap and sheepskin coat .
" Tit ! I say , Tit ! " said the groom .
" What ? " answered the old man absent - mindedly .
" Go , Tit !
Thresh a bit ! "
" Oh , you fool ! " said the old man , spitting angrily .
Some time passed in silence , and then the same joke was repeated .
Before five in the evening the battle had been lost at all points .
More than a hundred cannon were already in the hands of the French .
Przebysz'ewski and his corps had laid down their arms .
Other columns after losing half their men were retreating in disorderly confused masses .
The remains of Langeron 's and Dokht'urov 's mingled forces were crowding around the dams and banks of the ponds near the village of Augesd .
In the rearguard , Dokht'urov and others rallying some battalions kept up a musketry fire at the French cavalry that was pursuing our troops .
It was growing dusk .
Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew compressing the air around , or a shell burst in the midst of that dense throng , killing some and splashing with blood those near them .
D'olokhov - now an officer - wounded in the arm , and on foot , with the regimental commander on horseback and some ten men of his company , represented all that was left of that whole regiment .
A cannon ball killed someone behind them , another fell in front and splashed D'olokhov with blood .
The crowd , pushing forward desperately , squeezed together , moved a few steps , and again stopped .
" Move on a hundred yards and we are certainly saved , remain here another two minutes and it is certain death , " thought each one .
D'olokhov who was in the midst of the crowd forced his way to the edge of the dam , throwing two soldiers off their feet , and ran onto the slippery ice that covered the millpool .
" Turn this way ! "
he shouted , jumping over the ice which creaked under him ; " turn this way ! "
he shouted to those with the gun . "
It bears ! ... "
The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked , and it was plain that it would give way not only under a cannon or a crowd , but very soon even under his weight alone .
The men looked at him and pressed to the bank , hesitating to step onto the ice .
The general on horseback at the entrance to the dam raised his hand and opened his mouth to address D'olokhov .
Suddenly a cannon ball hissed so low above the crowd that everyone ducked .
It flopped into something moist , and the general fell from his horse in a pool of blood .
Nobody gave him a look or thought of raising him .
" Get onto the ice , over the ice !
Go on !
Turn !
Do n't you hear ?
Go on ! "
innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck the general , the men themselves not knowing what , or why , they were shouting .
One of the hindmost guns that was going onto the dam turned off onto the ice .
Crowds of soldiers from the dam began running onto the frozen pond .
The ice gave way under one of the foremost soldiers , and one leg slipped into the water .
He tried to right himself but fell in up to his waist .
The nearest soldiers shrank back , the gun driver stopped his horse , but from behind still came the shouts : " Onto the ice , why do you stop ?
Go on !
Go on ! "
And cries of horror were heard in the crowd .
The soldiers near the gun waved their arms and beat the horses to make them turn and move on .
The horses moved off the bank .
The ice , that had held under those on foot , collapsed in a great mass , and some forty men who were on it dashed , some forward and some back , drowning one another .
Still the cannon balls continued regularly to whistle and flop onto the ice and into the water and oftenest of all among the crowd that covered the dam , the pond , and the bank .
CHAPTER XIX
On the Pratzen Heights , where he had fallen with the flagstaff in his hand , lay Prince Andrew Bolk'onski bleeding profusely and unconsciously uttering a gentle , piteous , and childlike moan .
Toward evening he ceased moaning and became quite still .
He did not know how long his unconsciousness lasted .
Suddenly he again felt that he was alive and suffering from a burning , lacerating pain in his head .
" Where is it , that lofty sky that I did not know till now , but saw today ? " was his first thought . "
And I did not know this suffering either , " he thought .
" Yes , I did not know anything , anything at all till now .
But where am I ? "
He listened and heard the sound of approaching horses , and voices speaking French .
He opened his eyes .
Above him again was the same lofty sky with clouds that had risen and were floating still higher , and between them gleamed blue infinity .
He did not turn his head and did not see those who , judging by the sound of hoofs and voices , had ridden up and stopped near him .
It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides - de - camp .
Bonaparte riding over the battlefield had given final orders to strengthen the batteries firing at the Augesd Dam and was looking at the killed and wounded left on the field .
" Fine men ! "
remarked Napoleon , looking at a dead Russian grenadier , who , with his face buried in the ground and a blackened nape , lay on his stomach with an already stiffened arm flung wide .
" The ammunition for the guns in position is exhausted , Your Majesty , " said an adjutant who had come from the batteries that were firing at Augesd .
" Have some brought from the reserve , " said Napoleon , and having gone on a few steps he stopped before Prince Andrew , who lay on his back with the flagstaff that had been dropped beside him .
( The flag had already been taken by the French as a trophy . )
" That 's a fine death ! " said Napoleon as he gazed at Bolk'onski .
Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that it was Napoleon who said it .
He heard the speaker addressed as Sire .
But he heard the words as he might have heard the buzzing of a fly .
Not only did they not interest him , but he took no notice of them and at once forgot them .
His head was burning , he felt himself bleeding to death , and he saw above him the remote , lofty , and everlasting sky .
He collected all his strength , to stir and utter a sound .
He feebly moved his leg and uttered a weak , sickly groan which aroused his own pity .
" Ah !
He is alive , " said Napoleon .
" Lift this young man up and carry him to the dressing station . "
Having said this , Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes , who , hat in hand , rode up smiling to the Emperor to congratulate him on the victory .
Prince Andrew remembered nothing more : he lost consciousness from the terrible pain of being lifted onto the stretcher , the jolting while being moved , and the probing of his wound at the dressing station .
He did not regain consciousness till late in the day , when with other wounded and captured Russian officers he was carried to the hospital .
During this transfer he felt a little stronger and was able to look about him and even speak .
" There are so many prisoners today , nearly the whole Russian army , that he is probably tired of them , " said another officer .
" All the same !
They say this one is the commander of all the Emperor Alexander 's Guards , " said the first one , indicating a Russian officer in the white uniform of the Horse Guards .
Bolk'onski recognized Prince Repn'in whom he had met in Petersburg society .
Beside him stood a lad of nineteen , also a wounded officer of the Horse Guards .
Bonaparte , having come up at a gallop , stopped his horse .
" Which is the senior ? " he asked , on seeing the prisoners .
They named the colonel , Prince Repn'in .
" You are the commander of the Emperor Alexander 's regiment of Horse Guards ? " asked Napoleon .
" I commanded a squadron , " replied Repn'in .
" Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably , " said Napoleon .
" The praise of a great commander is a soldier 's highest reward , " said Repn'in .
" I bestow it with pleasure , " said Napoleon .
" And who is that young man beside you ? "
Prince Repn'in named Lieutenant Sukht'elen .
After looking at him Napoleon smiled .
" He 's very young to come to meddle with us . "
" Youth is no hindrance to courage , " muttered Sukht'elen in a failing voice .
" A splendid reply ! " said Napoleon . "
Young man , you will go far ! "
Prince Andrew , who had also been brought forward before the Emperor 's eyes to complete the show of prisoners , could not fail to attract his attention .
Napoleon apparently remembered seeing him on the battlefield and , addressing him , again used the epithet " young man " that was connected in his memory with Prince Andrew .
" Well , and you , young man , " said he .
" How do you feel , mon brave ? "
Though five minutes before , Prince Andrew had been able to say a few words to the soldiers who were carrying him , now with his eyes fixed straight on Napoleon , he was silent ....
Everything seemed so futile and insignificant in comparison with the stern and solemn train of thought that weakness from loss of blood , suffering , and the nearness of death aroused in him .
Au revoir , Prince Repn'in ! "
and he spurred his horse and galloped away .
His face shone with self - satisfaction and pleasure .
Prince Andrew did not see how and by whom it was replaced , but the little icon with its thin gold chain suddenly appeared upon his chest outside his uniform .
How good it would be to know where to seek for help in this life , and what to expect after it beyond the grave !
How happy and calm I should be if I could now say : ' Lord , have mercy on me ! ' ...
But to whom should I say that ?
There is nothing certain , nothing at all except the unimportance of everything I understand , and the greatness of something incomprehensible but all - important . "
The stretchers moved on .
At every jolt he again felt unendurable pain ; his feverishness increased and he grew delirious .
The quiet home life and peaceful happiness of Bald Hills presented itself to him .
He was already enjoying that happiness when that little Napoleon had suddenly appeared with his unsympathizing look of shortsighted delight at the misery of others , and doubts and torments had followed , and only the heavens promised peace .
Toward morning all these dreams melted and merged into the chaos and darkness of unconciousness and oblivion which in the opinion of Napoleon 's doctor , Larrey , was much more likely to end in death than in convalescence .
" He is a nervous , bilious subject , " said Larrey , " and will not recover . "
And Prince Andrew , with others fatally wounded , was left to the care of the inhabitants of the district .
BOOK FOUR : 1806
CHAPTER I
Early in the year 1806 Nicholas Rost'ov returned home on leave .
Den'isov was going home to Vor'onezh and Rost'ov persuaded him to travel with him as far as Moscow and to stay with him there .
" How much longer ?
How much longer ?
Oh , these insufferable streets , shops , bakers ' signboards , street lamps , and sleighs ! "
thought Rost'ov , when their leave permits had been passed at the town gate and they had entered Moscow .
" Den'isov !
We 're here !
He 's asleep , " he added , leaning forward with his whole body as if in that position he hoped to hasten the speed of the sleigh .
Den'isov gave no answer .
" There 's the corner at the crossroads , where the cabman , Zakh'ar , has his stand , and there 's Zakh'ar himself and still the same horse !
And here 's the little shop where we used to buy gingerbread !
Ca n't you hurry up ?
Now then ! "
" Which house is it ? " asked the driver .
" Why , that one , right at the end , the big one .
Do n't you see ?
That 's our house , " said Rost'ov .
" Of course , it 's our house !
Den'isov ,
Den'isov !
We 're almost there ! "
Den'isov raised his head , coughed , and made no answer .
" Dm'itri , " said Rost'ov to his valet on the box , " those lights are in our house , are n't they ? "
" Yes , sir , and there 's a light in your father 's study . "
" Then they 've not gone to bed yet ?
What do you think ?
Mind now , do n't forget to put out my new coat , " added Rost'ov , fingering his new mustache . "
Now then , get on , " he shouted to the driver . "
Do wake up , V'aska ! "
he went on , turning to Den'isov , whose head was again nodding .
" Come , get on !
You shall have three rubles for vodka - get on ! "
Rost'ov shouted , when the sleigh was only three houses from his door .
It seemed to him the horses were not moving at all .
He sprang out before the sleigh stopped , and ran into the hall .
The house stood cold and silent , as if quite regardless of who had come to it .
There was no one in the hall . "
Oh God !
Is everyone all right ? "
he thought , stopping for a moment with a sinking heart , and then immediately starting to run along the hall and up the warped steps of the familiar staircase .
The well - known old door handle , which always angered the countess when it was not properly cleaned , turned as loosely as ever .
A solitary tallow candle burned in the anteroom .
Old Michael was asleep on the chest .
Prok'ofy , the footman , who was so strong that he could lift the back of the carriage from behind , sat plaiting slippers out of cloth selvedges .
He looked up at the opening door and his expression of sleepy indifference suddenly changed to one of delighted amazement .
" Gracious heavens !
The young count ! "
he cried , recognizing his young master . "
Can it be ?
My treasure ! "
and Prok'ofy , trembling with excitement , rushed toward the drawing room door , probably in order to announce him , but , changing his mind , came back and stooped to kiss the young man 's shoulder .
" All well ? " asked Rost'ov , drawing away his arm .
" Yes , God be thanked !
Yes !
They 've just finished supper .
Let me have a look at you , your excellency . "
" Is everything quite all right ? "
" The Lord be thanked , yes ! "
Rost'ov , who had completely forgotten Den'isov , not wishing anyone to forestall him , threw off his fur coat and ran on tiptoe through the large dark ballroom .
Another and yet another creature of the same kind sprang from a second door and a third ; more hugging , more kissing , more outcries , and tears of joy .
He could not distinguish which was Papa , which Nat'asha , and which P'etya .
Everyone shouted , talked , and kissed him at the same time .
Only his mother was not there , he noticed that .
" And I did not know ...
Nicholas ...
My darling ! ... "
" Here he is ... our own ... K'olya ,
* dear fellow ...
How he has changed ! ...
Where are the candles ? ...
Tea ! ... "
* Nicholas .
" And me , kiss me ! "
" Dearest ... and me ! "
P'etya , clinging to his legs , kept shouting , " And me too ! "
All around were loving eyes glistening with tears of joy , and all around were lips seeking a kiss .
S'onya too , all rosy red , clung to his arm and , radiant with bliss , looked eagerly toward his eyes , waiting for the look for which she longed .
S'onya now was sixteen
and she was very pretty , especially at this moment of happy , rapturous excitement .
She gazed at him , not taking her eyes off him , and smiling and holding her breath .
He gave her a grateful look , but was still expectant and looking for someone .
The old countess had not yet come .
But now steps were heard at the door , steps so rapid that they could hardly be his mother 's .
Yet it was she , dressed in a new gown which he did not know , made since he had left .
All the others let him go , and he ran to her .
When they met , she fell on his breast , sobbing .
She could not lift her face , but only pressed it to the cold braiding of his hussar 's jacket .
Den'isov , who had come into the room unnoticed by anyone , stood there and wiped his eyes at the sight .
" Vas'ili Den'isov , your son 's friend , " he said , introducing himself to the count , who was looking inquiringly at him .
" You are most welcome !
I know , I know , " said the count , kissing and embracing Den'isov . "
Nicholas wrote us ...
Nat'asha , V'era , look !
Here is Den'isov ! "
The same happy , rapturous faces turned to the shaggy figure of Den'isov .
" Darling Den'isov ! " screamed Nat'asha , beside herself with rapture , springing to him , putting her arms round him , and kissing him .
This escapade made everybody feel confused .
Den'isov blushed too , but smiled and , taking Nat'asha 's hand , kissed it .
Den'isov was shown to the room prepared for him , and the Rost'ovs all gathered round Nicholas in the sitting room .
His brother and sisters struggled for the places nearest to him and disputed with one another who should bring him his tea , handkerchief , and pipe .
Rost'ov was very happy in the love they showed him ; but the first moment of meeting had been so beatific that his present joy seemed insufficient , and he kept expecting something more , more and yet more .
Next morning , after the fatigues of their journey , the travelers slept till ten o'clock .
In the room next their bedroom there was a confusion of sabers , satchels , sabretaches , open portmanteaus , and dirty boots .
Two freshly cleaned pairs with spurs had just been placed by the wall .
The servants were bringing in jugs and basins , hot water for shaving , and their well - brushed clothes .
There was a masculine odor and a smell of tobacco .
" Hallo , Gw'iska - my pipe ! " came Vas'ili Den'isov 's husky voice . "
Wost'ov , get up ! "
Rost'ov , rubbing his eyes that seemed glued together , raised his disheveled head from the hot pillow .
" Why , is it late ? "
" Late ! It 's nearly ten o'clock , " answered Nat'asha 's voice .
A rustle of starched petticoats and the whispering and laughter of girls ' voices came from the adjoining room .
The door was opened a crack and there was a glimpse of something blue , of ribbons , black hair , and merry faces .
It was Nat'asha , S'onya , and P'etya , who had come to see whether they were getting up .
" Nicholas !
Get up ! "
Nat'asha 's voice was again heard at the door .
" Directly ! "
" Is this your saber ? " he shouted .
The girls sprang aside .
Den'isov hid his hairy legs under the blanket , looking with a scared face at his comrade for help .
The door , having let P'etya in , closed again .
A sound of laughter came from behind it .
" Nicholas !
Come out in your dressing gown ! " said Nat'asha 's voice .
" Is this your saber ? " asked P'etya . "
Or is it yours ?
" he said , addressing the black - mustached Den'isov with servile deference .
Rost'ov hurriedly put something on his feet , drew on his dressing gown , and went out .
Nat'asha had put on one spurred boot and was just getting her foot into the other .
S'onya , when he came in , was twirling round and was about to expand her dresses into a balloon and sit down .
They were dressed alike , in new pale - blue frocks , and were both fresh , rosy , and bright .
S'onya ran away , but Nat'asha , taking her brother 's arm , led him into the sitting room , where they began talking .
They hardly gave one another time to ask questions and give replies concerning a thousand little matters which could not interest anyone but themselves .
Nat'asha laughed at every word he said or that she said herself , not because what they were saying was amusing , but because she felt happy and was unable to control her joy which expressed itself by laughter .
" Oh , how nice , how splendid ! " she said to everything .
" No , but listen , " she said , " now you are quite a man , are n't you ?
I 'm awfully glad you 're my brother . "
She touched his mustache .
" I want to know what you men are like .
Are you the same as we ?
No ? "
" Why did S'onya run away ? " asked Rost'ov .
" Ah , yes !
That 's a whole long story !
How are you going to speak to her - thou or you ? "
" As may happen , " said Rost'ov .
" No , call her you , please !
I 'll tell you all about it some other time .
No , I 'll tell you now .
You know S'onya 's my dearest friend .
Such a friend that I burned my arm for her sake .
Look here ! "
She pulled up her muslin sleeve and showed him a red scar on her long , slender , delicate arm , high above the elbow on that part that is covered even by a ball dress .
" I burned this to prove my love for her .
I just heated a ruler in the fire and pressed it there ! "
" Well , and is that all ? " he asked .
" We are such friends , such friends !
All that ruler business was just nonsense , but we are friends forever .
She , if she loves anyone , does it for life , but I do n't understand that , I forget quickly . "
" Well , what then ? "
" Well , she loves me and you like that . "
Nat'asha suddenly flushed .
" Why , you remember before you went away ? ...
Well , she says you are to forget all that ....
She says : ' I shall love him always , but let him be free . '
Is n't that lovely and noble !
Yes , very noble ?
Is n't it ? "
asked Nat'asha , so seriously and excitedly that it was evident that what she was now saying she had talked of before , with tears .
Rost'ov became thoughtful .
" I never go back on my word , " he said .
" Besides , S'onya is so charming that only a fool would renounce such happiness . "
" No , no ! " cried Nat'asha , " she and I have already talked it over .
We knew you 'd say so .
But it wo n't do , because you see , if you say that - if you consider yourself bound by your promise - it will seem as if she had not meant it seriously .
It makes it as if you were marrying her because you must , and that would n't do at all . "
Rost'ov saw that it had been well considered by them .
S'onya had already struck him by her beauty on the preceding day .
Today , when he had caught a glimpse of her , she seemed still more lovely .
She was a charming girl of sixteen , evidently passionately in love with him ( he did not doubt that for an instant ) .
Why should he not love her now , and even marry her , Rost'ov thought , but just now there were so many other pleasures and interests before him ! "
Yes , they have taken a wise decision , " he thought , " I must remain free . "
" Well then , that 's excellent , " said he .
" We 'll talk it over later on .
Oh , how glad I am to have you ! "
" Well , and are you still true to Bor'is ? " he continued .
" Oh , what nonsense ! " cried Nat'asha , laughing .
" I do n't think about him or anyone else , and I do n't want anything of the kind . "
" Dear me !
Then what are you up to now ? "
" Now ? " repeated Nat'asha , and a happy smile lit up her face . "
Have you seen Duport ? "
" No . "
" Not seen Duport - the famous dancer ?
Well then , you wo n't understand .
That 's what I 'm up to . "
" See , I 'm standing !
See !
" she said , but could not maintain herself on her toes any longer . "
So that 's what I 'm up to !
I 'll never marry anyone , but will be a dancer .
Only do n't tell anyone . "
Rost'ov laughed so loud and merrily that Den'isov , in his bedroom , felt envious and Nat'asha could not help joining in .
" No , but do n't you think it 's nice ? " she kept repeating .
" Nice !
And so you no longer wish to marry Bor'is ? "
Nat'asha flared up .
" I do n't want to marry anyone .
And I 'll tell him so when I see him ! "
" Dear me ! " said Rost'ov .
" But that 's all rubbish , " Nat'asha chattered on . "
And is Den'isov nice ? " she asked .
" Yes , indeed ! "
" Oh , well then , good - by : go and dress .
Is he very terrible , Den'isov ? "
" Why terrible ? " asked Nicholas . "
No , V'aska is a splendid fellow . "
" You call him V'aska ?
That 's funny !
And is he very nice ? "
" Very . "
" Well then , be quick .
We 'll all have breakfast together . "
And Nat'asha rose and went out of the room on tiptoe , like a ballet dancer , but smiling as only happy girls of fifteen can smile .
When Rost'ov met S'onya in the drawing room , he reddened .
He did not know how to behave with her .
He kissed her hand and addressed her not as thou
but as you - S'onya .
But their eyes met and said thou , and exchanged tender kisses .
Her looks asked him to forgive her for having dared , by Nat'asha 's intermediacy , to remind him of his promise , and then thanked him for his love .
His looks thanked her for offering him his freedom and told her that one way or another he would never cease to love her , for that would be impossible .
" How strange it is , " said V'era , selecting a moment when all were silent , " that S'onya and Nicholas now say you to one another and meet like strangers . "
CHAPTER II
The Rost'ovs knew everybody in Moscow .
After a short period of adapting himself to the old conditions of life , Nicholas found it very pleasant to be at home again .
He felt that he had grown up and matured very much .
His despair at failing in a Scripture examination , his borrowing money from Gavr'il to pay a sleigh driver , his kissing S'onya on the sly - he now recalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind .
He knew a lady on one of the boulevards whom he visited of an evening .
His passion for the Emperor had cooled somewhat in Moscow .
During Rost'ov 's short stay in Moscow , before rejoining the army , he did not draw closer to S'onya , but rather drifted away from her .
When he thought of S'onya , during this stay in Moscow , he said to himself , " Ah , there will be , and there are , many more such girls somewhere whom I do not yet know .
There will be time enough to think about love when I want to , but now I have no time . "
Besides , it seemed to him that the society of women was rather derogatory to his manhood .
He went to balls and into ladies ' society with an affectation of doing so against his will .
The races , the English Club , sprees with Den'isov , and visits to a certain house - that was another matter and quite the thing for a dashing young hussar !
At the beginning of March , old Count Ily'a Rost'ov was very busy arranging a dinner in honor of Prince Bagrati'on at the English Club .
The count had been a member and on the committee of the club from the day it was founded .
" Well then , mind and have cocks ' comb in the turtle soup , you know ! "
" Shall we have three cold dishes then ? " asked the cook .
The count considered .
" We ca n't have less - yes , three ... the mayonnaise , that 's one , " said he , bending down a finger .
" Then am I to order those large sterlets ? " asked the steward .
" Yes , it ca n't be helped if they wo n't take less .
Ah , dear me !
I was forgetting .
We must have another entr'ee .
Ah , goodness gracious ! "
he clutched at his head .
" Who is going to get me the flowers ?
Dm'itri !
Eh , Dm'itri !
Gallop off to our Moscow estate , " he said to the factotum who appeared at his call . "
Hurry off and tell Maks'im , the gardener , to set the serfs to work .
Say that everything out of the hothouses must be brought here well wrapped up in felt .
I must have two hundred pots here on Friday . "
" Ah , my boy , my head 's in a whirl ! " said the old man with a smile , as if he felt a little confused before his son . "
Now , if you would only help a bit !
I must have singers too .
I shall have my own orchestra , but should n't we get the gypsy singers as well ?
You military men like that sort of thing . "
" Really , Papa , I believe Prince Bagrati'on worried himself less before the battle of Sch"on Grabern than you do now , " said his son with a smile .
The old count pretended to be angry .
" Yes , you talk , but try it yourself ! "
And the count turned to the cook , who , with a shrewd and respectful expression , looked observantly and sympathetically at the father and son .
" What have the young people come to nowadays , eh , Feokt'ist ? " said he .
"
Laughing at us old fellows ! "
" That 's so , your excellency , all they have to do is to eat a good dinner , but providing it and serving it all up , that 's not their business ! "
" That 's it , that 's it ! "
We ca n't get them from anyone else .
He 's not there himself , so you 'll have to go in and ask the princesses ; and from there go on to the Rasguly'ay - the coachman
Ip'atka knows - and look up the gypsy Ily'ushka , the one who danced at Count Orl'ov 's , you remember , in a white Cossack coat , and bring him along to me . "
" And am I to bring the gypsy girls along with him ? " asked Nicholas , laughing . "
Dear , dear ! ... "
At that moment , with noiseless footsteps and with the businesslike , preoccupied , yet meekly Christian look which never left her face , Anna Mikh'aylovna entered the hall .
Though she came upon the count in his dressing gown every day , he invariably became confused and begged her to excuse his costume .
" No matter at all , my dear count , " she said , meekly closing her eyes . "
But I 'll go to Bez'ukhov 's myself .
Pierre has arrived , and now we shall get anything we want from his hothouses .
I have to see him in any case .
He has forwarded me a letter from Bor'is .
Thank God , Bor'is is now on the staff . "
The count was delighted at Anna Mikh'aylovna 's taking upon herself one of his commissions and ordered the small closed carriage for her .
" Tell Bez'ukhov to come .
I 'll put his name down .
Is his wife with him ? " he asked .
Anna Mikh'aylovna turned up her eyes , and profound sadness was depicted on her face .
" Ah , my dear friend , he is very unfortunate , " she said .
" If what we hear is true , it is dreadful .
How little we dreamed of such a thing when we were rejoicing at his happiness !
And such a lofty angelic soul as young Bez'ukhov !
Yes , I pity him from my heart , and shall try to give him what consolation I can . "
" Wh - what is the matter ? " asked both the young and old Rost'ov .
Anna Mikh'aylovna sighed deeply .
" D'olokhov , Mary Iv'anovna 's son , " she said in a mysterious whisper , " has compromised her completely , they say .
Pierre took him up , invited him to his house in Petersburg , and now ...
" They say Pierre is quite broken by his misfortune . "
" Dear , dear !
But still tell him to come to the club - it will all blow over .
It will be a tremendous banquet . "
On the first arrival of the news of the battle of Austerlitz , Moscow had been bewildered .
At that time , the Russians were so used to victories that on receiving news of the defeat some would simply not believe it , while others sought some extraordinary explanation of so strange an event .
The Moscovites felt that something was wrong and that to discuss the bad news was difficult , and so it was best to be silent .
But after a while , just as a jury comes out of its room , the bigwigs who guided the club 's opinion reappeared , and everybody began speaking clearly and definitely .
Reasons were found for the incredible , unheard - of , and impossible event of a Russian defeat , everything became clear , and in all corners of Moscow the same things began to be said .
But the army , the Russian army , everyone declared , was extraordinary and had achieved miracles of valor .
The soldiers , officers , and generals were heroes .
What also conduced to Bagrati'on 's being selected as Moscow 's hero was the fact that he had no connections in the city and was a stranger there .
In his person , honor was shown to a simple fighting Russian soldier without connections and intrigues , and to one who was associated by memories of the Italian campaign with the name of Suv'orov .
Moreover , paying such honor to Bagrati'on was the best way of expressing disapproval and dislike of Kut'uzov .
" Had there been no Bagrati'on , it would have been necessary to invent him , " said the wit Shinsh'in , parodying the words of Voltaire .
Kut'uzov
no one spoke of , except some who abused him in whispers , calling him a court weathercock and an old satyr .
On all sides , new and fresh anecdotes were heard of individual examples of heroism shown by our officers and men at Austerlitz .
One had saved a standard , another had killed five Frenchmen , a third had loaded five cannon singlehanded .
Berg was mentioned , by those who did not know him , as having , when wounded in the right hand , taken his sword in the left , and gone forward .
Of Bolk'onski , nothing was said , and only those who knew him intimately regretted that he had died so young , leaving a pregnant wife with his eccentric father .
CHAPTER III
On that third of March , all the rooms in the English Club were filled with a hum of conversation , like the hum of bees swarming in springtime .
Powdered footmen , in livery with buckled shoes and smart stockings , stood at every door anxiously noting visitors ' every movement in order to offer their services .
Most of those present were elderly , respected men with broad , self - confident faces , fat fingers , and resolute gestures and voices .
This class of guests and members sat in certain habitual places and met in certain habitual groups .
A minority of those present were casual guests - chiefly young men , among whom were Den'isov , Rost'ov , and D'olokhov - who was now again an officer in the Sem"enov regiment .
Nesv'itski was there as an old member of the club .
Pierre , who at his wife 's command had let his hair grow and abandoned his spectacles , went about the rooms fashionably dressed but looking sad and dull .
Here , as elsewhere , he was surrounded by an atmosphere of subservience to his wealth , and being in the habit of lording it over these people , he treated them with absent - minded contempt .
By his age he should have belonged to the younger men , but by his wealth and connections he belonged to the groups of old and honored guests , and so he went from one group to another .
Some of the most important old men were the center of groups which even strangers approached respectfully to hear the voices of well - known men .
The largest circles formed round Count Rostopch'in , Val'uev , and Nar'yshkin .
Rostopch'in was describing how the Russians had been overwhelmed by flying Austrians and had had to force their way through them with bayonets .
Val'uev was confidentially telling that Uv'arov had been sent from Petersburg to ascertain what Moscow was thinking about Austerlitz .
In the third circle , Nar'yshkin was speaking of the meeting of the Austrian Council of War at which Suv'orov crowed like a cock in reply to the nonsense talked by the Austrian generals .
Young Rost'ov stood at a window with D'olokhov , whose acquaintance he had lately made and highly valued .
The old count came up to them and pressed D'olokhov 's hand .
" Please come and visit us ...
you know my brave boy ... been together out there ...
both playing the hero ...
Ah , Vas'ili Ign'atovich ...
How d'ye do , old fellow ? "
Bagrati'on appeared in the doorway of the anteroom without hat or sword , which , in accord with the club custom , he had given up to the hall porter .
Evidently just before coming to the dinner he had had his hair and whiskers trimmed , which changed his appearance for the worse .
There was something na"ively festive in his air , which , in conjunction with his firm and virile features , gave him a rather comical expression .
Beklesh"ev and Theodore Uv'arov , who had arrived with him , paused at the doorway to allow him , as the guest of honor , to enter first .
Bagrati'on was embarrassed , not wishing to avail himself of their courtesy , and this caused some delay at the doors , but after all he did at last enter first .
Count Ily'a Rost'ov , laughing and repeating the words , " Make way , dear boy !
Make way , make way ! " pushed through the crowd more energetically than anyone , led the guests into the drawing room , and seated them on the center sofa .
The bigwigs , the most respected members of the club , beset the new arrivals .
Count Ily'a , again thrusting his way through the crowd , went out of the drawing room and reappeared a minute later with another committeeman , carrying a large silver salver which he presented to Prince Bagrati'on .
On the salver lay some verses composed and printed in the hero 's honor .
Bagrati'on , on seeing the salver , glanced around in dismay , as though seeking help .
But all eyes demanded that he should submit .
Feeling himself in their power , he resolutely took the salver with both hands and looked sternly and reproachfully at the count who had presented it to him .
Someone obligingly took the dish from Bagrati'on ( or he would , it seemed , have held it till evening and have gone in to dinner with it ) and drew his attention to the verses .
" Well , I will read them , then ! "
Bagrati'on seemed to say , and , fixing his weary eyes on the paper , began to read them with a fixed and serious expression .
But the author himself took the verses and began reading them aloud .
Bagrati'on bowed his head and listened :
Bring glory then to Alexander 's reign And on the throne our Titus shield .
A dreaded foe be thou , kindhearted as a man , A Rhipheus at home , a Caesar in the field !
E'en fortunate Napoleon Knows by experience , now , Bagrati'on , And dare not Herculean Russians trouble ...
But before he had finished reading , a stentorian major - domo announced that dinner was ready !
The door opened , and from the dining room came the resounding strains of the polonaise :
Conquest 's joyful thunder waken , Triumph , valiant Russians , now ! ...
and Count Rost'ov , glancing angrily at the author who went on reading his verses , bowed to Bagrati'on .
Everyone rose , feeling that dinner was more important than verses , and Bagrati'on , again preceding all the rest , went in to dinner .
He was seated in the place of honor between two Alexanders - Beklesh"ev and Nar'yshkin - which was a significant allusion to the name of the sovereign .
Three hundred persons took their seats in the dining room , according to their rank and importance : the more important nearer to the honored guest , as naturally as water flows deepest where the land lies lowest .
Nicholas Rost'ov , with Den'isov and his new acquaintance , D'olokhov , sat almost at the middle of the table .
Facing them sat Pierre , beside Prince Nesv'itski .
Count Ily'a Rost'ov with the other members of the committee sat facing Bagrati'on and , as the very personification of Moscow hospitality , did the honors to the prince .
His efforts had not been in vain .
The dinner , both the Lenten and the other fare , was splendid , yet he could not feel quite at ease till the end of the meal .
He winked at the butler , whispered directions to the footmen , and awaited each expected dish with some anxiety .
Everything was excellent .
With the second course , a gigantic sterlet ( at sight of which Ily'a Rost'ov blushed with self - conscious pleasure ) , the footmen began popping corks and filling the champagne glasses .
After the fish , which made a certain sensation , the count exchanged glances with the other committeemen .
" There will be many toasts , it 's time to begin , " he whispered , and taking up his glass , he rose .
All were silent , waiting for what he would say .
" To the health of our Sovereign , the Emperor ! " he cried , and at the same moment his kindly eyes grew moist with tears of joy and enthusiasm .
The band immediately struck up " Conquest 's joyful thunder waken ... "
All rose and cried " Hurrah ! "
Bagrati'on also rose and shouted " Hurrah ! " in exactly the same voice in which he had shouted it on the field at Sch"on Grabern .
Young Rost'ov 's ecstatic voice could be heard above the three hundred others .
He nearly wept . "
To the health of our Sovereign , the Emperor !
" he roared , " Hurrah ! " and emptying his glass at one gulp he dashed it to the floor .
Many followed his example , and the loud shouting continued for a long time .
When the voices subsided , the footmen cleared away the broken glass and everybody sat down again , smiling at the noise they had made and exchanging remarks .
The old count rose once more , glanced at a note lying beside his plate , and proposed a toast , " To the health of the hero of our last campaign , Prince Peter Iv'anovich Bagrati'on ! "
and again his blue eyes grew moist .
" Hurrah ! " cried the three hundred voices again , but instead of the band a choir began singing a cantata composed by Paul Iv'anovich Kut'uzov :
Russians !
O'er all barriers on !
Courage conquest guarantees ;
Have we not Bagrati'on ?
He brings foemen to their knees , ... etc .
As soon as the singing was over , another and another toast was proposed and
Count Ily'a Rost'ov became more and more moved , more glass was smashed , and the shouting grew louder .
At that toast , the count took out his handkerchief and , covering his face , wept outright .
CHAPTER IV
Pierre sat opposite D'olokhov and Nicholas Rost'ov .
As usual , he ate and drank much , and eagerly .
But those who knew him intimately noticed that some great change had come over him that day .
He was silent all through dinner and looked about , blinking and scowling , or , with fixed eyes and a look of complete absent - mindedness , kept rubbing the bridge of his nose .
His face was depressed and gloomy .
He seemed to see and hear nothing of what was going on around him and to be absorbed by some depressing and unsolved problem .
Pierre absolutely disbelieved both the princess ' hints and the letter , but he feared now to look at D'olokhov , who was sitting opposite him .
Every time he chanced to meet D'olokhov 's handsome insolent eyes , Pierre felt something terrible and monstrous rising in his soul and turned quickly away .
He involuntarily remembered how D'olokhov , who had fully recovered his former position after the campaign , had returned to Petersburg and come to him .
Availing himself of his friendly relations with Pierre as a boon companion , D'olokhov had come straight to his house , and Pierre had put him up and lent him money .
" Yes , he is very handsome , " thought Pierre , " and I know him .
It would be particularly pleasant to him to dishonor my name and ridicule me , just because I have exerted myself on his behalf , befriended him , and helped him .
I know and understand
what a spice that would add to the pleasure of deceiving me , if it really were true .
Yes , if it were true ,
but I do not believe it .
I have no right to , and ca n't , believe it . "
That expression was often on D'olokhov 's face when looking at him . "
Yes , he is a bully , " thought Pierre , " to kill a man means nothing to him .
It must seem to him that everyone is afraid of him , and that must please him .
He must think that I , too , am afraid of him - and in fact I am afraid of him , " he thought , and again he felt something terrible and monstrous rising in his soul .
D'olokhov , Den'isov , and Rost'ov were now sitting opposite Pierre and seemed very gay .
When the Emperor 's health was drunk , Pierre , lost in thought , did not rise or lift his glass .
" What are you about ? " shouted Rost'ov , looking at him in an ecstasy of exasperation .
" Do n't you hear it 's His Majesty the Emperor 's health ? "
Pierre sighed , rose submissively , emptied his glass , and , waiting till all were seated again , turned with his kindly smile to Rost'ov .
" Why , I did n't recognize you ! " he said .
But Rost'ov was otherwise engaged ; he was shouting " Hurrah ! "
" Why do n't you renew the acquaintance ? " said D'olokhov to Rost'ov .
" Confound him , he 's a fool ! " said Rost'ov .
" One should make up to the husbands of pretty women , " said Den'isov .
Pierre did not catch what they were saying , but knew they were talking about him .
He reddened and turned away .
" Here 's to the health of lovely women , Peterkin - and their lovers ! " he added .
Pierre , with downcast eyes , drank out of his glass without looking at D'olokhov or answering him .
The footman , who was distributing leaflets with Kut'uzov 's cantata , laid one before Pierre as one of the principal guests .
He was just going to take it when D'olokhov , leaning across , snatched it from his hand and began reading it .
Pierre looked at D'olokhov and his eyes dropped , the something terrible and monstrous that had tormented him all dinnertime rose and took possession of him .
He leaned his whole massive body across the table .
" How dare you take it ? " he shouted .
Hearing that cry and seeing to whom it was addressed , Nesv'itski and the neighbor on his right quickly turned in alarm to Bez'ukhov .
" Do n't !
Do n't !
What are you about ? " whispered their frightened voices .
D'olokhov looked at Pierre with clear , mirthful , cruel eyes , and that smile of his which seemed to say , " Ah !
This is what I like ! "
" You sha n't have it ! " he said distinctly .
Pale , with quivering lips , Pierre snatched the copy .
" You ... !
you ...
scoundrel !
I challenge you ! "
he ejaculated , and , pushing back his chair , he rose from the table .
At the very instant he did this and uttered those words , Pierre felt that the question of his wife 's guilt which had been tormenting him the whole day was finally and indubitably answered in the affirmative .
He hated her and was forever sundered from her .
Despite Den'isov 's request that he would take no part in the matter , Rost'ov agreed to be D'olokhov 's second , and after dinner he discussed the arrangements for the duel with Nesv'itski , Bez'ukhov 's second .
Pierre went home , but Rost'ov with D'olokhov and Den'isov stayed on at the club till late , listening to the gypsies and other singers .
" Well then , till tomorrow at Sok'olniki , " said D'olokhov , as he took leave of Rost'ov in the club porch .
" And do you feel quite calm ? "
Rost'ov asked .
D'olokhov paused .
" Well , you see , I 'll tell you the whole secret of dueling in two words .
But go with the firm intention of killing your man as quickly and surely as possible , and then all will be right , as our bear huntsman at Kostrom'a used to tell me . '
Everyone fears a bear , ' he says , ' but when you see one your fear 's all gone , and your only thought is not to let him get away ! '
And that 's how it is with me .
` A demain , mon cher . "
*
* Till tomorrow , my dear fellow .
Next day , at eight in the morning , Pierre and Nesv'itski drove to the Sok'olniki forest and found D'olokhov , Den'isov , and Rost'ov already there .
Pierre had the air of a man preoccupied with considerations which had no connection with the matter in hand .
His haggard face was yellow .
He had evidently not slept that night .
He looked about distractedly and screwed up his eyes as if dazzled by the sun .
" I should perhaps have done the same thing in his place , " thought Pierre .
" It 's even certain that I should have done the same , then why this duel , this murder ?
Either I shall kill him , or he will hit me in the head , or elbow , or knee .
Ca n't I go away from here , run away , bury myself somewhere ?
" passed through his mind .
But just at moments when such thoughts occurred to him , he would ask in a particularly calm and absent - minded way , which inspired the respect of the onlookers , " Will it be long ?
Are things ready ? "
When all was ready , the sabers stuck in the snow to mark the barriers , and the pistols loaded , Nesv'itski went up to Pierre .
I think there is no sufficient ground for this affair , or for blood to be shed over it ....
You were not right , not quite in the right , you were impetuous ... "
" Oh yes , it is horribly stupid , " said Pierre .
" You know , Count , it is much more honorable to admit one 's mistake than to let matters become irreparable .
There was no insult on either side .
Allow me to convey .... "
" No ! What is there to talk about ? " said Pierre .
" It 's all the same ....
Is everything ready ? " he added . "
Only tell me where to go and where to shoot , " he said with an unnaturally gentle smile .
He took the pistol in his hand and began asking about the working of the trigger , as he had not before held a pistol in his hand - a fact that he did not wish to confess .
" Oh yes , like that , I know , I only forgot , " said he .
" No apologies , none whatever , " said D'olokhov to Den'isov
( who on his side had been attempting a reconciliation ) , and he also went up to the appointed place .
The antagonists stood forty paces apart at the farther edge of the clearing .
It was thawing and misty ; at forty paces ' distance nothing could be seen .
For three minutes all had been ready , but they still delayed and all were silent .
CHAPTER V
" Well begin ! " said D'olokhov .
" All right , " said Pierre , still smiling in the same way .
A feeling of dread was in the air .
It was evident that the affair so lightly begun could no longer be averted but was taking its course independently of men 's will .
Den'isov first went to the barrier and announced : " As the adve'sawies have wefused a weconciliation , please pwoceed .
Take your pistols , and at the word thwee begin to advance .
" O - ne ! T - wo !
Thwee ! "
he shouted angrily and stepped aside .
The combatants advanced along the trodden tracks , nearer and nearer to one another , beginning to see one another through the mist .
They had the right to fire when they liked as they approached the barrier .
D'olokhov walked slowly without raising his pistol , looking intently with his bright , sparkling blue eyes into his antagonist 's face .
His mouth wore its usual semblance of a smile .
" So I can fire when I like ! " said Pierre , and at the word " three , " he went quickly forward , missing the trodden path and stepping into the deep snow .
He held the pistol in his right hand at arm 's length , apparently afraid of shooting himself with it .
His left hand he held carefully back , because he wished to support his right hand with it and knew he must not do so .
Having advanced six paces and strayed off the track into the snow , Pierre looked down at his feet , then quickly glanced at D'olokhov and , bending his finger as he had been shown , fired .
Not at all expecting so loud a report , Pierre shuddered at the sound and then , smiling at his own sensations , stood still .
The smoke , rendered denser by the mist , prevented him from seeing anything for an instant , but there was no second report as he had expected .
He only heard D'olokhov 's hurried steps , and his figure came in view through the smoke .
He was pressing one hand to his left side , while the other clutched his drooping pistol .
His face was pale .
Rost'ov ran toward him and said something .
" No - o - o ! " muttered D'olokhov through his teeth , " no , it 's not over . "
And after stumbling a few staggering steps right up to the saber , he sank on the snow beside it .
His left hand was bloody ; he wiped it on his coat and supported himself with it .
His frowning face was pallid and quivered .
" Plea ... " began D'olokhov , but could not at first pronounce the word .
" Please , " he uttered with an effort .
Pierre , hardly restraining his sobs , began running toward D'olokhov and was about to cross the space between the barriers , when D'olokhov cried :
" To your barrier ! "
and Pierre , grasping what was meant , stopped by his saber .
Only ten paces divided them .
D'olokhov lowered his head to the snow , greedily bit at it , again raised his head , adjusted himself , drew in his legs and sat up , seeking a firm center of gravity .
He sucked and swallowed the cold snow , his lips quivered but his eyes , still smiling , glittered with effort and exasperation as he mustered his remaining strength .
He raised his pistol and aimed .
" Sideways !
Cover yourself with your pistol ! "
ejaculated Nesv'itski .
" Cover yourself ! "
even Den'isov cried to his adversary .
Pierre , with a gentle smile of pity and remorse , his arms and legs helplessly spread out , stood with his broad chest directly facing D'olokhov and looked sorrowfully at him .
Den'isov , Rost'ov , and Nesv'itski closed their eyes .
At the same instant they heard a report and D'olokhov 's angry cry .
" Missed ! " shouted D'olokhov , and he lay helplessly , face downwards on the snow .
Pierre clutched his temples , and turning round went into the forest , trampling through the deep snow , and muttering incoherent words :
" Folly ... folly !
Death ... lies ...
" he repeated , puckering his face .
Nesv'itski stopped him and took him home .
Rost'ov and Den'isov drove away with the wounded D'olokhov .
The latter lay silent in the sleigh with closed eyes and did not answer a word to the questions addressed to him .
But on entering Moscow he suddenly came to and , lifting his head with an effort , took Rost'ov , who was sitting beside him , by the hand .
Rost'ov was struck by the totally altered and unexpectedly rapturous and tender expression on D'olokhov 's face .
" Well ? How do you feel ? " he asked .
" Bad !
But it 's not that , my friend- " said D'olokhov with a gasping voice .
" Where are we ?
In Moscow , I know .
I do n't matter , but I have killed her , killed ...
She wo n't get over it !
She wo n't survive .... "
" Who ? " asked Rost'ov .
" My mother !
My mother , my angel , my adored angel mother , " and D'olokhov pressed Rost'ov 's hand and burst into tears .
When he had become a little quieter , he explained to Rost'ov that he was living with his mother , who , if she saw him dying , would not survive it .
He implored Rost'ov to go on and prepare her .
CHAPTER VI
Pierre had of late rarely seen his wife alone .
Both in Petersburg and in Moscow their house was always full of visitors .
The night after the duel he did not go to his bedroom but , as he often did , remained in his father 's room , that huge room in which Count Bez'ukhov had died .
He lay down on the sofa meaning to fall asleep and forget all that had happened to him , but could not do so .
" What has happened ? " he asked himself .
" I have killed her lover , yes , killed my wife 's lover .
Yes , that was it !
And why ?
How did I come to do it?"-"Because
you married her , " answered an inner voice .
" But in what was I to blame ? " he asked . "
In marrying her without loving her ; in deceiving yourself and her . "
And he vividly recalled that moment after supper at Prince Vas'ili 's , when he spoke those words he had found so difficult to utter : " I love you . "
" It all comes from that !
Even then I felt it , " he thought .
" I felt then that it was not so , that I had no right to do it .
And so it turns out . "
He remembered his honeymoon and blushed at the recollection .
So this is what I was proud of !
I then thought that I did not understand her .
Now I have spoken that terrible word to myself all has become clear .
" Anatole used to come to borrow money from her and used to kiss her naked shoulders .
She did not give him the money , but let herself be kissed .
One day I asked her if she felt any symptoms of pregnancy .
She laughed contemptuously and said she was not a fool to want to have children , and that she was not going to have any children by me . "
Then he recalled the coarseness and bluntness of her thoughts and the vulgarity of the expressions that were natural to her , though she had been brought up in the most aristocratic circles .
" I 'm not such a fool ....
Just you try it on ....
Allez - vous promener , " * she used to say .
Often seeing the success she had with young and old men and women
Pierre could not understand why he did not love her .
* " You clear out of this . "
" Yes , I never loved her , " said he to himself ; " I knew she was a depraved woman , " he repeated , " but dared not admit it to myself .
And now there 's D'olokhov sitting in the snow with a forced smile and perhaps dying , while meeting my remorse with some forced bravado ! "
Pierre was one of those people who , in spite of an appearance of what is called weak character , do not seek a confidant in their troubles .
He digested his sufferings alone .
" It is all , all her fault , " he said to himself ; " but what of that ?
Why did I bind myself to her ?
Why did I say ' Je vous aime ' * to her , which was a lie , and worse than a lie ?
I am guilty and must endure ... what ?
A slur on my name ?
A misfortune for life ?
Oh , that 's nonsense , " he thought .
" The slur on my name and honor - that 's all apart from myself . "
* I love you .
Then Robespierre was beheaded for being a despot .
Who is right and who is wrong ?
No one !
But if you are alive - live : tomorrow you 'll die as I might have died an hour ago .
And is it worth tormenting oneself , when one has only a moment of life in comparison with eternity ? "
" Why did I tell her that ' Je vous aime ' ? "
he kept repeating to himself .
And when he had said it for the tenth time , Moli`ere 's words : " Mais que diable allait - il faire dans cette
gal`ere ? "
* occurred to him , and he began to laugh at himself .
* " But what the devil was he doing in that galley ? "
In the night he called his valet and told him to pack up to go to Petersburg .
He could not imagine how he could speak to her now .
He resolved to go away next day and leave a letter informing her of his intention to part from her forever .
Next morning when the valet came into the room with his coffee , Pierre was lying asleep on the ottoman with an open book in his hand .
He woke up and looked round for a while with a startled expression , unable to realize where he was .
" The countess told me to inquire whether your excellency was at home , " said the valet .
With her imperturbable calm she did not begin to speak in front of the valet .
She knew of the duel and had come to speak about it .
She waited till the valet had set down the coffee things and left the room .
Pierre looked at her timidly over his spectacles , and like a hare surrounded by hounds who lays back her ears and continues to crouch motionless before her enemies , he tried to continue reading .
But feeling this to be senseless and impossible , he again glanced timidly at her .
She did not sit down but looked at him with a contemptuous smile , waiting for the valet to go .
" Well , what 's this now ?
What have you been up to now , I should like to know ?
" she asked sternly .
" I ?
What have I ... ?
" stammered Pierre .
" So it seems you 're a hero , eh ?
Come now , what was this duel about ?
What is it meant to prove ?
What ?
I ask you . "
Pierre turned over heavily on the ottoman and opened his mouth , but could not reply .
" If you wo n't answer , I 'll tell you ... "
H'el`ene went on .
" You believe everything you 're told .
You were told ... "
H'el`ene laughed , " that D'olokhov was my lover , " she said in French with her coarse plainness of speech , uttering the word amant as casually as any other word , " and you believed it !
Well , what have you proved ?
What does this duel prove ?
That you 're a fool , que vous ^etes
un sot , but everybody knew that .
What will be the result ?
That I shall be the laughingstock of all Moscow , that everyone will say that you , drunk and not knowing what you were about , challenged a man you are jealous of without cause . "
H'el`ene raised her voice and became more and more excited , " A man who 's a better man than you in every way ... "
" Hm ... Hm ... ! " growled Pierre , frowning without looking at her , and not moving a muscle .
" And how could you believe he was my lover ?
Why ?
Because I like his company ?
If you were cleverer and more agreeable , I should prefer yours . "
" Do n't speak to me ...
I beg you , " muttered Pierre hoarsely .
" Why should n't I speak ?
Pierre wished to say something , looked at her with eyes whose strange expression she did not understand , and lay down again .
He was suffering physically at that moment , there was a weight on his chest and he could not breathe .
He knew that he must do something to put an end to this suffering , but what he wanted to do was too terrible .
" We had better separate , " he muttered in a broken voice .
" Separate ?
Very well , but only if you give me a fortune , " said H'el`ene . "
Separate !
That 's a thing to frighten me with ! "
Pierre leaped up from the sofa and rushed staggering toward her .
" I 'll kill you ! "
he shouted , and seizing the marble top of a table with a strength he had never before felt , he made a step toward her brandishing the slab .
H'el`ene 's face became terrible , she shrieked and sprang aside .
His father 's nature showed itself in Pierre .
He felt the fascination and delight of frenzy .
He flung down the slab , broke it , and swooping down on her with outstretched hands shouted , " Get out ! "
in such a terrible voice that the whole house heard it with horror .
God knows what he would have done at that moment had H'el`ene not fled from the room .
A week later Pierre gave his wife full power to control all his estates in Great Russia , which formed the larger part of his property , and left for Petersburg alone .
CHAPTER VII
The old prince understood from this official report that our army had been defeated .
A week after the gazette report of the battle of Austerlitz came a letter from Kut'uzov informing the prince of the fate that had befallen his son .
To the great regret of myself and of the whole army it is still uncertain whether he is alive or not .
When Princess Mary went to him at the usual hour he was working at his lathe and , as usual , did not look round at her .
" Ah , Princess Mary ! "
he said suddenly in an unnatural voice , throwing down his chisel .
( The wheel continued to revolve by its own impetus , and Princess Mary long remembered the dying creak of that wheel , which merged in her memory with what followed . )
She approached him , saw his face , and something gave way within her .
Her eyes grew dim .
" Father ! Andrew!"-said the ungraceful , awkward princess with such an indescribable charm of sorrow and self - forgetfulness that her father could not bear her look but turned away with a sob .
" Bad news !
He 's not among the prisoners nor among the killed !
Kut'uzov writes ... " and he screamed as piercingly as if he wished to drive the princess away by that scream ... " Killed ! "
The princess did not fall down or faint .
She was already pale , but on hearing these words her face changed and something brightened in her beautiful , radiant eyes .
It was as if joy - a supreme joy apart from the joys and sorrows of this world - overflowed the great grief within her .
She forgot all fear of her father , went up to him , took his hand , and drawing him down put her arm round his thin , scraggy neck .
" Father , " she said , " do not turn away from me , let us weep together . "
" Scoundrels !
Blackguards ! " shrieked the old man , turning his face away from her . "
Destroying the army , destroying the men !
And why ?
Go , go and tell Lise . "
The princess sank helplessly into an armchair beside her father and wept .
She saw her brother now as he had been at the moment when he took leave of her and of Lise , his look tender yet proud .
She saw him tender and amused as he was when he put on the little icon . "
Did he believe ?
Had he repented of his unbelief ?
Was he now there ?
There in the realms of eternal peace and blessedness ?
" she thought .
" Father , tell me how it happened , " she asked through her tears .
" Go !
Go !
Killed in battle , where the best of Russian men and Russia 's glory were led to destruction .
Go , Princess Mary .
Go and tell Lise .
I will follow . "
When Princess Mary returned from her father , the little princess sat working and looked up with that curious expression of inner , happy calm peculiar to pregnant women .
It was evident that her eyes did not see Princess Mary but were looking within ... into herself ... at something joyful and mysterious taking place within her .
" Mary , " she said , moving away from the embroidery frame and lying back , " give me your hand .
" She took her sister - in - law 's hand and held it below her waist .
Her eyes were smiling expectantly , her downy lip rose and remained lifted in childlike happiness .
Princess Mary knelt down before her and hid her face in the folds of her sister - in - law 's dress .
" There , there !
Do you feel it ?
I feel so strange .
And do you know , Mary , I am going to love him very much , " said Lise , looking with bright and happy eyes at her sister - in - law .
Princess Mary could not lift her head , she was weeping .
" What is the matter , Mary ? "
" Nothing ... only I feel sad ... sad about Andrew , " she said , wiping away her tears on her sister - in - law 's knee .
Several times in the course of the morning Princess Mary began trying to prepare her sister - in - law , and every time began to cry .
Unobservant as was the little princess , these tears , the cause of which she did not understand , agitated her .
She said nothing but looked about uneasily as if in search of something .
Before dinner the old prince , of whom she was always afraid , came into her room with a peculiarly restless and malign expression and went out again without saying a word .
She looked at Princess Mary , then sat thinking for a while with that expression of attention to something within her that is only seen in pregnant women , and suddenly began to cry .
" Has anything come from Andrew ? " she asked .
" No , you know it 's too soon for news .
But my father is anxious and I feel afraid . "
" So there 's nothing ? "
" Nothing , " answered Princess Mary , looking firmly with her radiant eyes at her sister - in - law .
She had determined not to tell her and persuaded her father to hide the terrible news from her till after her confinement , which was expected within a few days .
Princess Mary and the old prince
each bore and hid their grief in their own way .
He tried not to change his former way of life , but his strength failed him .
He walked less , ate less , slept less , and became weaker every day .
Princess Mary hoped .
She prayed for her brother as living and was always awaiting news of his return .
CHAPTER VIII
" Dearest , I 'm afraid this morning 's fruschtique * -as F'oka the cook calls it - has disagreed with me . "
* Fr"uhst"uck : breakfast .
" What is the matter with you , my darling ?
You look pale .
Oh , you are very pale ! " said Princess Mary in alarm , running with her soft , ponderous steps up to her sister - in - law .
" Your excellency , should not Mary Bogd'anovna be sent for ? " said one of the maids who was present .
( Mary Bogd'anovna was a midwife from the neighboring town , who had been at Bald Hills for the last fortnight . )
" Oh yes , " assented Princess Mary , " perhaps that 's it .
I 'll go .
Courage , my angel . "
She kissed Lise and was about to leave the room .
" Oh , no , no ! "
And besides the pallor and the physical suffering on the little princess ' face , an expression of childish fear of inevitable pain showed itself .
" No , it 's only indigestion ? ...
Say it 's only indigestion , say so , Mary !
Say ... " And the little princess began to cry capriciously like a suffering child and to wring her little hands even with some affectation .
Princess Mary ran out of the room to fetch Mary Bogd'anovna .
" Mon Dieu !
Mon Dieu !
Oh ! "
she heard as she left the room .
The midwife was already on her way to meet her , rubbing her small , plump white hands with an air of calm importance .
" Mary Bogd'anovna , I think it 's beginning ! " said Princess Mary looking at the midwife with wide - open eyes of alarm .
" Well , the Lord be thanked , Princess , " said Mary Bogd'anovna , not hastening her steps .
" You young ladies should not know anything about it . "
" But how is it the doctor from Moscow is not here yet ? " said the princess .
( In accordance with Lise 's and Prince Andrew 's wishes they had sent in good time to Moscow for a doctor and were expecting him at any moment . )
" No matter , Princess , do n't be alarmed , " said Mary Bogd'anovna .
" We 'll manage very well without a doctor . "
Five minutes later Princess Mary from her room heard something heavy being carried by .
She looked out .
The men servants were carrying the large leather sofa from Prince Andrew 's study into the bedroom .
On their faces was a quiet and solemn look .
Princess Mary sat alone in her room listening to the sounds in the house , now and then opening her door when someone passed and watching what was going on in the passage .
Some women passing with quiet steps in and out of the bedroom glanced at the princess and turned away .
She did not venture to ask any questions , and shut the door again , now sitting down in her easy chair , now taking her prayer book , now kneeling before the icon stand .
To her surprise and distress she found that her prayers did not calm her excitement .
Suddenly her door opened softly and her old nurse , Prask'ovya S'avishna , who hardly ever came to that room as the old prince had forbidden it , appeared on the threshold with a shawl round her head .
" Oh , nurse , I 'm so glad ! "
" God is merciful , birdie . "
The nurse lit the gilt candles before the icons and sat down by the door with her knitting .
Princess Mary took a book and began reading .
Only when footsteps or voices were heard did they look at one another , the princess anxious and inquiring , the nurse encouraging .
Everyone in the house was dominated by the same feeling that Princess Mary experienced as she sat in her room .
There was no laughter in the maids ' large hall .
In the men servants ' hall all sat waiting , silently and alert .
In the outlying serfs ' quarters torches and candles were burning and no one slept .
" Inform the prince that labor has begun , " said Mary Bogd'anovna , giving the messenger a significant look .
T'ikhon went and told the prince .
" Very good ! " said the prince closing the door behind him , and T'ikhon did not hear the slightest sound from the study after that .
The most solemn mystery in the world continued its course .
Evening passed , night came , and the feeling of suspense and softening of heart in the presence of the unfathomable did not lessen but increased .
No one slept .
It was one of those March nights when winter seems to wish to resume its sway and scatters its last snows and storms with desperate fury .
" God is merciful , doctors are never needed , " she said .
Princess Mary shuddered ; her nurse , putting down the stocking she was knitting , went to the window and leaning out tried to catch the open casement .
The cold wind flapped the ends of her kerchief and her loose locks of gray hair .
" Princess , my dear , there 's someone driving up the avenue ! "
she said , holding the casement and not closing it . "
With lanterns .
Most likely the doctor . "
" Oh , my God ! thank God ! " said Princess Mary .
" I must go and meet him , he does not know Russian . "
Princess Mary threw a shawl over her head and ran to meet the newcomer .
As she was crossing the anteroom she saw through the window a carriage with lanterns , standing at the entrance .
She went out on the stairs .
On a banister post stood a tallow candle which guttered in the draft .
On the landing below , Philip , the footman , stood looking scared and holding another candle .
Still lower , beyond the turn of the staircase , one could hear the footstep of someone in thick felt boots , and a voice that seemed familiar to Princess Mary was saying something .
" Thank God ! " said the voice . "
And Father ? "
" Gone to bed , " replied the voice of Demy'an the house steward , who was downstairs .
Then the voice said something more , Demy'an replied , and the steps in the felt boots approached the unseen bend of the staircase more rapidly .
" It 's Andrew ! " thought Princess Mary .
Yes , it was he , pale , thin , with a changed and strangely softened but agitated expression on his face .
He came up the stairs and embraced his sister .
" What a strange fate , M'asha darling ! "
And having taken off his cloak and felt boots , he went to the little princess ' apartment .
CHAPTER IX
The little princess lay supported by pillows , with a white cap on her head ( the pains had just left her ) .
Strands of her black hair lay round her inflamed and perspiring cheeks , her charming rosy mouth with its downy lip was open
and she was smiling joyfully .
Prince Andrew entered and paused facing her at the foot of the sofa on which she was lying .
Her glittering eyes , filled with childlike fear and excitement , rested on him without changing their expression .
" I love you all and have done no harm to anyone ; why must I suffer so ?
Help me !
" her look seemed to say .
She saw her husband , but did not realize the significance of his appearance before her now .
Prince Andrew went round the sofa and kissed her forehead .
" My darling ! " he said - a word he had never used to her before .
" God is merciful .... "
She looked at him inquiringly and with childlike reproach .
" I expected help from you
and I get none , none from you either ! "
said her eyes .
She was not surprised at his having come ; she did not realize that he had come .
His coming had nothing to do with her sufferings or with their relief .
The pangs began again and Mary Bogd'anovna advised Prince Andrew to leave the room .
The doctor entered .
Prince Andrew went out and , meeting Princess Mary , again joined her .
They began talking in whispers , but their talk broke off at every moment .
They waited and listened .
" Go , dear , " said Princess Mary .
Prince Andrew went again to his wife and sat waiting in the room next to hers .
A woman came from the bedroom with a frightened face and became confused when she saw Prince Andrew .
He covered his face with his hands and remained so for some minutes .
Piteous , helpless , animal moans came through the door .
Prince Andrew got up , went to the door , and tried to open it .
Someone was holding it shut .
" You ca n't come in !
You ca n't ! " said a terrified voice from within .
He began pacing the room .
The screaming ceased , and a few more seconds went by .
Then suddenly a terrible shriek - it could not be hers , she could not scream like that - came from the bedroom .
Prince Andrew ran to the door ; the scream ceased and he heard the wail of an infant .
" What have they taken a baby in there for ? " thought Prince Andrew in the first second .
"
A baby ?
What baby ... ?
Why is there a baby there ?
Or is the baby born ? "
Then suddenly he realized the joyful significance of that wail ; tears choked him , and leaning his elbows on the window sill he began to cry , sobbing like a child .
The door opened .
The doctor with his shirt sleeves tucked up , without a coat , pale and with a trembling jaw , came out of the room .
Prince Andrew turned to him , but the doctor gave him a bewildered look and passed by without a word .
A woman rushed out and seeing Prince Andrew stopped , hesitating on the threshold .
He went into his wife 's room .
" I love you all , and have done no harm to anyone ; and what have you done to me ?"- said her charming , pathetic , dead face .
In a corner of the room something red and tiny gave a grunt and squealed in Mary Bogd'anovna 's trembling white hands .
Two hours later Prince Andrew , stepping softly , went into his father 's room .
The old man already knew everything .
He was standing close to the door and as soon as it opened his rough old arms closed like a vise round his son 's neck , and without a word he began to sob like a child .
Three days later the little princess was buried , and Prince Andrew went up the steps to where the coffin stood , to give her the farewell kiss .
And there in the coffin was the same face , though with closed eyes .
"
Ah , what have you done to me ?
" it still seemed to say , and Prince Andrew felt that something gave way in his soul and that he was guilty of a sin he could neither remedy nor forget .
He could not weep .
And at the sight the old man turned angrily away .
Another five days passed , and then the young Prince Nicholas Andr'eevich was baptized .
The wet nurse supported the coverlet with her chin , while the priest with a goose feather anointed the boy 's little red and wrinkled soles and palms .
His grandfather , who was his godfather , trembling and afraid of dropping him , carried the infant round the battered tin font and handed him over to the godmother , Princess Mary .
Prince Andrew sat in another room , faint with fear lest the baby should be drowned in the font , and awaited the termination of the ceremony .
He looked up joyfully at the baby when the nurse brought it to him and nodded approval when she told him that the wax with the baby 's hair had not sunk in the font but had floated .
CHAPTER X
As a result he could not go to the country with the rest of the family , but was kept all summer in Moscow by his new duties .
D'olokhov recovered , and Rost'ov became very friendly with him during his convalescence .
D'olokhov lay ill at his mother 's who loved him passionately and tenderly , and old Mary Iv'anovna , who had grown fond of Rost'ov for his friendship to her F'edya , often talked to him about her son .
" Yes , Count , " she would say , " he is too noble and pure - souled for our present , depraved world .
No one now loves virtue ; it seems like a reproach to everyone .
Now tell me , Count , was it right , was it honorable , of Bez'ukhov ?
And F'edya , with his noble spirit , loved him and even now never says a word against him .
Those pranks in Petersburg when they played some tricks on a policeman , did n't they do it together ?
And there ! Bez'ukhov got off scotfree , while F'edya had to bear the whole burden on his shoulders .
Fancy what he had to go through !
It 's true he has been reinstated , but how could they fail to do that ?
I think there were not many such gallant sons of the fatherland out there as he .
And now - this duel !
Have these people no feeling , or honor ?
Knowing him to be an only son , to challenge him and shoot so straight !
It 's well God had mercy on us .
And what was it for ?
Who does n't have intrigues nowadays ?
Why , if he was so jealous , as I see things he should have shown it sooner , but he lets it go on for months .
And then to call him out , reckoning on F'edya not fighting because he owed him money !
What baseness !
What meanness !
I know you understand F'edya , my dear count ; that , believe me , is why I am so fond of you .
Few people do understand him .
He is such a lofty , heavenly soul ! "
D'olokhov himself during his convalescence spoke to Rost'ov in a way no one would have expected of him .
" I know people consider me a bad man ! " he said .
" Let them !
I have an adored , a priceless mother , and two or three friends - you among them - and as for the rest I only care about them in so far as they are harmful or useful .
And most of them are harmful , especially the women .
Yes , dear boy , " he continued , " I have met loving , noble , high - minded men , but I have not yet met any women - countesses or cooks - who were not venal .
I have not yet met that divine purity and devotion I look for in women .
If I found such a one I 'd give my life for her !
But those ! ...
" and he made a gesture of contempt . "
And believe me , if I still value my life it is only because I still hope to meet such a divine creature , who will regenerate , purify , and elevate me .
But you do n't understand it . "
" Oh , yes , I quite understand , " answered Rost'ov , who was under his new friend 's influence .
In the autumn the Rost'ovs returned to Moscow .
Early in the winter Den'isov also came back and stayed with them .
The first half of the winter of 1806 , which Nicholas Rost'ov spent in Moscow , was one of the happiest , merriest times for him and the whole family .
Nicholas brought many young men to his parents ' house .
V'era was a handsome girl of twenty ; S'onya a girl of sixteen with all the charm of an opening flower ; Nat'asha , half grown up and half child , was now childishly amusing , now girlishly enchanting .
At that time in the Rost'ovs ' house there prevailed an amorous atmosphere characteristic of homes where there are very young and very charming girls .
Among the young men introduced by Rost'ov one of the first was D'olokhov , whom everyone in the house liked except Nat'asha .
She almost quarreled with her brother about him .
She insisted that he was a bad man , and that in the duel with Bez'ukhov , Pierre was right and D'olokhov wrong , and further that he was disagreeable and unnatural .
" There 's nothing for me to understand , " she cried out with resolute self - will , " he is wicked and heartless .
There now , I like your Den'isov though he is a rake and all that , still I like him ; so you see I do understand .
I do n't know how to put it ... with this one everything is calculated , and I do n't like that .
But Den'isov ... "
" Oh , Den'isov is quite different , " replied Nicholas , implying that even Den'isov was nothing compared to D'olokhov-"you must understand what a soul there is in D'olokhov , you should see him with his mother .
What a heart ! "
" Well , I do n't know about that , but I am uncomfortable with him .
And do you know he has fallen in love with S'onya ? "
" What nonsense ... "
" I 'm certain of it ; you 'll see . "
Nat'asha 's prediction proved true .
He came because of S'onya .
And S'onya , though she would never have dared to say so , knew it and blushed scarlet every time D'olokhov appeared .
D'olokhov often dined at the Rost'ovs ' , never missed a performance at which they were present , and went to Iogel 's balls for young people which the Rost'ovs always attended .
He was pointedly attentive to S'onya and looked at her in such a way that not only could she not bear his glances without coloring , but even the old countess and Nat'asha blushed when they saw his looks .
It was evident that this strange , strong man was under the irresistible influence of the dark , graceful girl who loved another .
Rost'ov noticed something new in D'olokhov 's relations with S'onya , but he did not explain to himself what these new relations were . "
They 're always in love with someone , " he thought of S'onya and Nat'asha .
But he was not as much at ease with S'onya and D'olokhov as before and was less frequently at home .
In the autumn of 1806 everybody had again begun talking of the war with Napoleon with even greater warmth than the year before .
Orders were given to raise recruits , ten men in every thousand for the regular army , and besides this , nine men in every thousand for the militia .
Everywhere Bonaparte was anathematized and in Moscow nothing but the coming war was talked of .
His approaching departure did not prevent his amusing himself , but rather gave zest to his pleasures .
He spent the greater part of his time away from home , at dinners , parties , and balls .
CHAPTER XI
On the third day after Christmas Nicholas dined at home , a thing he had rarely done of late .
It was a grand farewell dinner , as he and Den'isov were leaving to join their regiment after Epiphany .
About twenty people were present , including D'olokhov and Den'isov .
Never had love been so much in the air , and never had the amorous atmosphere made itself so strongly felt in the Rost'ovs ' house as at this holiday time . "
Seize the moments of happiness , love and be loved !
That is the only reality in the world , all else is folly .
It is the one thing we are interested in here , " said the spirit of the place .
Nicholas , having as usual exhausted two pairs of horses , without visiting all the places he meant to go to and where he had been invited , returned home just before dinner .
As soon as he entered he noticed and felt the tension of the amorous air in the house , and also noticed a curious embarrassment among some of those present .
S'onya , D'olokhov , and the old countess were especially disturbed , and to a lesser degree Nat'asha .
Nicholas understood that something must have happened between S'onya and D'olokhov before dinner , and with the kindly sensitiveness natural to him was very gentle and wary with them both at dinner .
On that same evening there was to be one of the balls that Iogel ( the dancing master ) gave for his pupils during the holidays .
" Nicholas , will you come to Iogel 's ?
Please do ! " said Nat'asha . "
He asked you , and Vas'ili Dm'itrich * is also going . "
* Den'isov .
" Where would I not go at the countess ' command ! " said Den'isov , who at the Rost'ovs ' had jocularly assumed the role of Nat'asha 's knight .
" I 'm even weady to dance the pas de ch^ale . "
" If I have time , " answered Nicholas . "
But I promised the Arkh'arovs ; they have a party . "
" And you ? "
he asked D'olokhov , but as soon as he had asked the question he noticed that it should not have been put .
" Perhaps , " coldly and angrily replied D'olokhov , glancing at S'onya , and , scowling , he gave Nicholas just such a look as he had given Pierre at the club dinner .
" There is something up , " thought Nicholas , and he was further confirmed in this conclusion by the fact that D'olokhov left immediately after dinner .
He called Nat'asha and asked her what was the matter .
" And I was looking for you , " said Nat'asha running out to him .
" I told you , but you would not believe it , " she said triumphantly . "
He has proposed to S'onya ! "
Little as Nicholas had occupied himself with S'onya of late , something seemed to give way within him at this news .
D'olokhov was a suitable and in some respects a brilliant match for the dowerless , orphan girl .
From the point of view of the old countess and of society it was out of the question for her to refuse him .
And therefore Nicholas ' first feeling on hearing the news was one of anger with S'onya ....
He tried to say , " That 's capital ; of course she 'll forget her childish promises and accept the offer , " but before he had time to say it Nat'asha began again .
" And fancy !
she refused him quite definitely ! "
adding , after a pause , " she told him she loved another . "
" Yes , my S'onya could not have done otherwise ! " thought Nicholas .
" Much as Mamma pressed her , she refused , and I know she wo n't change once she has said ... "
" And Mamma pressed her ! " said Nicholas reproachfully .
" Yes , " said Nat'asha . "
Do you know , Nicholas - don't be angry -
but I know you will not marry her .
I know , heaven knows how , but I know for certain that you wo n't marry her . "
" Now you do n't know that at all ! " said Nicholas .
" But I must talk to her .
What a darling S'onya is ! "
he added with a smile .
" Ah , she is indeed a darling !
I 'll send her to you . "
And Nat'asha kissed her brother and ran away .
A minute later S'onya came in with a frightened , guilty , and scared look .
Nicholas went up to her and kissed her hand .
This was the first time since his return that they had talked alone and about their love .
S'onya interrupted him .
" I have already refused , " she said hurriedly .
" If you are refusing for my sake , I am afraid that I ... "
S'onya again interrupted .
She gave him an imploring , frightened look .
" Nicholas , do n't tell me that ! "
she said .
" No , but I must .
It may be arrogant of me , but still it is best to say it .
If you refuse him on my account , I must tell you the whole truth .
I love you , and I think I love you more than anyone else .... "
" That is enough for me , " said S'onya , blushing .
Then I am young .
Mamma does not wish it .
In a word , I make no promise .
And I beg you to consider D'olokhov 's offer , " he said , articulating his friend 's name with difficulty .
" Do n't say that to me !
I want nothing .
I love you as a brother and always shall , and I want nothing more . "
" You are an angel : I am not worthy of you , but I am afraid of misleading you . "
And Nicholas again kissed her hand .
CHAPTER XII
Iogel 's were the most enjoyable balls in Moscow .
That year two marriages had come of these balls .
The two pretty young Princesses Gorchak'ov met suitors there and were married and so further increased the fame of these dances .
There was the fact that only those came who wished to dance and amuse themselves as girls of thirteen and fourteen do who are wearing long dresses for the first time .
With scarcely any exceptions they all were , or seemed to be , pretty - so rapturous were their smiles and so sparkling their eyes .
Iogel had taken a ballroom in Bez'ukhov 's house , and the ball , as everyone said , was a great success .
There were many pretty girls and the Rost'ov girls were among the prettiest .
They were both particularly happy and gay .
Nat'asha no less proud of her first long dress and of being at a real ball was even happier .
They were both dressed in white muslin with pink ribbons .
Nat'asha fell in love the very moment she entered the ballroom .
She was not in love with anyone in particular , but with everyone .
Whatever person she happened to look at she was in love with for that moment .
" Oh , how delightful it is ! "
she kept saying , running up to S'onya .
Nicholas and Den'isov were walking up and down , looking with kindly patronage at the dancers .
" How sweet she is - she will be a weal beauty ! " said Den'isov .
" Who ? "
" Countess Nat'asha , " answered Den'isov .
" And how she dances !
What gwace !
" he said again after a pause .
" Who are you talking about ? "
" About your sister , " ejaculated Den'isov testily .
Rost'ov smiled .
" My dear count , you were one of my best pupils - you must dance , " said little Iogel coming up to Nicholas .
" Look how many charming young ladies- " He turned with the same request to Den'isov who was also a former pupil of his .
" No , my dear fellow , I 'll be a wallflower , " said Den'isov .
" Do n't you wecollect what bad use I made of your lessons ? "
" Oh no ! " said Iogel , hastening to reassure him .
" You were only inattentive , but you had talent -
oh yes , you had talent ! "
The band struck up the newly introduced mazurka .
Nicholas could not refuse Iogel and asked S'onya to dance .
Noiselessly , skillfully stepping with his little feet in low shoes , Iogel flew first across the hall with Nat'asha , who , though shy , went on carefully executing her steps .
Den'isov did not take his eyes off her and beat time with his saber in a way that clearly indicated that if he was not dancing it was because he would not and not because he could not .
In the middle of a figure he beckoned to Rost'ov who was passing :
" This is not at all the thing , " he said .
" What sort of Polish mazuwka is this ?
But she does dance splendidly . "
Knowing that Den'isov had a reputation even in Poland for the masterly way in which he danced the mazurka , Nicholas ran up to Nat'asha :
" Go and choose Den'isov .
He is a real dancer , a wonder ! " he said .
When it came to Nat'asha 's turn to choose a partner , she rose and , tripping rapidly across in her little shoes trimmed with bows , ran timidly to the corner where Den'isov sat .
She saw that everybody was looking at her and waiting .
Nicholas saw that Den'isov was refusing though he smiled delightedly .
He ran up to them .
" Please , Vas'ili Dm'itrich , " Nat'asha was saying , " do come ! "
" Oh no , let me off , Countess , " Den'isov replied .
" Now then , V'aska , " said Nicholas .
" They coax me as if I were V'aska the cat ! " said Den'isov jokingly .
" I 'll sing for you a whole evening , " said Nat'asha .
" Oh , the faiwy !
She can do anything with me ! "
said Den'isov , and he unhooked his saber .
He came out from behind the chairs , clasped his partner 's hand firmly , threw back his head , and advanced his foot , waiting for the beat .
Only on horse back and in the mazurka was Den'isov 's short stature not noticeable and he looked the fine fellow he felt himself to be .
Nat'asha guessed what he meant to do , and abandoning herself to him followed his lead hardly knowing how .
When at last , smartly whirling his partner round in front of her chair , he drew up with a click of his spurs and bowed to her , Nat'asha did not even make him a curtsy .
She fixed her eyes on him in amazement , smiling as if she did not recognize him .
" What does this mean ? " she brought out .
Den'isov , flushed after the mazurka and mopping himself with his handkerchief , sat down by Nat'asha and did not leave her for the rest of the evening .
CHAPTER XIII
For two days after that Rost'ov did not see D'olokhov at his own or at D'olokhov 's home : on the third day he received a note from him :
About ten o'clock Rost'ov went to the English Hotel straight from the theater , where he had been with his family and Den'isov .
He was at once shown to the best room , which D'olokhov had taken for that evening .
Some twenty men were gathered round a table at which D'olokhov sat between two candles .
On the table was a pile of gold and paper money , and he was keeping the bank .
Rost'ov had not seen him since his proposal and S'onya 's refusal and felt uncomfortable at the thought of how they would meet .
D'olokhov 's clear , cold glance met Rost'ov as soon as he entered the door , as though he had long expected him .
" It 's a long time since we met , " he said .
" Thanks for coming .
I 'll just finish dealing , and then Ily'ushka will come with his chorus . "
" I called once or twice at your house , " said Rost'ov , reddening .
D'olokhov made no reply .
" You may punt , " he said .
Rost'ov recalled at that moment a strange conversation he had once had with D'olokhov . "
None but fools trust to luck in play , " D'olokhov had then said .
" Or are you afraid to play with me ? "
D'olokhov now asked as if guessing Rost'ov 's thought .
Rost'ov felt ill at ease .
He tried , but failed , to find some joke with which to reply to D'olokhov 's words .
But before he had thought of anything , D'olokhov , looking straight in his face , said slowly and deliberately so that everyone could hear :
" Do you remember we had a talk about cards ... '
He 's a fool who trusts to luck , one should make certain , ' and I want to try . "
" To try his luck or the certainty ? " Rost'ov asked himself .
" Well , you 'd better not play , " D'olokhov added , and springing a new pack of cards said : " Bank , gentlemen ! "
Moving the money forward he prepared to deal .
Rost'ov sat down by his side and at first did not play .
D'olokhov kept glancing at him .
" Why do n't you play ? " he asked .
And strange to say Nicholas felt that he could not help taking up a card , putting a small stake on it , and beginning to play .
" I have no money with me , " he said .
" I 'll trust you . "
Rost'ov staked five rubles on a card and lost , staked again , and again lost .
D'olokhov " killed , " that is , beat , ten cards of Rost'ov 's running .
" Gentlemen , " said D'olokhov after he had dealt for some time . "
Please place your money on the cards or I may get muddled in the reckoning . "
One of the players said he hoped he might be trusted .
" Yes , you might , but I am afraid of getting the accounts mixed .
So I ask you to put the money on your cards , " replied D'olokhov . "
Do n't stint yourself , we 'll settle afterwards , " he added , turning to Rost'ov .
The game continued ; a waiter kept handing round champagne .
All Rost'ov 's cards were beaten and he had eight hundred rubles scored up against him .
He wrote " 800 rubles " on a card , but while the waiter filled his glass he changed his mind and altered it to his usual stake of twenty rubles .
" Leave it , " said D'olokhov , though he did not seem to be even looking at Rost'ov , " you 'll win it back all the sooner .
I lose to the others but win from you .
Or are you afraid of me ?
" he asked again .
Rost'ov submitted .
He let the eight hundred remain and laid down a seven of hearts with a torn corner , which he had picked up from the floor .
He well remembered that seven afterwards .
Much depended on Rost'ov 's winning or losing on that seven of hearts .
Nicholas had replied that it would be more than enough for him and that he gave his word of honor not to take anything more till the spring .
Now only twelve hundred rubles was left of that money , so that this seven of hearts meant for him not only the loss of sixteen hundred rubles , but the necessity of going back on his word .
With a sinking heart he watched D'olokhov 's hands and thought , " Now then , make haste and let me have this card
and I 'll take my cap and drive home to supper with Den'isov , Nat'asha , and S'onya , and will certainly never touch a card again .
That could not be , yet he awaited with a sinking heart the movement of D'olokhov 's hands .
Those broad , reddish hands , with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt cuffs , laid down the pack and took up a glass and a pipe that were handed him .
" Yes , gentlemen , I 've been told there 's a rumor going about Moscow that I 'm a sharper , so I advise you to be careful . "
" Come now , deal ! " exclaimed Rost'ov .
" Oh , those Moscow gossips ! " said D'olokhov , and he took up the cards with a smile .
" Aah ! "
Rost'ov almost screamed lifting both hands to his head .
The seven he needed was lying uppermost , the first card in the pack .
He had lost more than he could pay .
" Still , do n't ruin yourself ! " said D'olokhov with a side glance at Rost'ov as he continued to deal .
CHAPTER XIV
An hour and a half later most of the players were but little interested in their own play .
The whole interest was concentrated on Rost'ov .
In reality it already exceeded twenty thousand rubles .
D'olokhov was no longer listening to stories or telling them , but followed every movement of Rost'ov 's hands and occasionally ran his eyes over the score against him .
He had decided to play until that score reached forty - three thousand .
He had fixed on that number because forty - three was the sum of his and S'onya 's joint ages .
Rost'ov , leaning his head on both hands , sat at the table which was scrawled over with figures , wet with spilled wine , and littered with cards .
One tormenting impression did not leave him : that those broad - boned reddish hands with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt sleeves , those hands which he loved and hated , held him in their power .
" Six hundred rubles , ace , a corner , a nine ... winning it back 's impossible ...
Oh , how pleasant it was at home ! ...
The knave , double or quits ...
it ca n't be ! ...
And why is he doing this to me ? "
Rost'ov pondered .
Sometimes he staked a large sum , but D'olokhov refused to accept it and fixed the stake himself .
" He knows of course what this loss means to me .
He ca n't want my ruin .
Was n't he my friend ?
Was n't I fond of him ?
But it 's not his fault .
What 's he to do if he has such luck ? ...
And it 's not my fault either , " he thought to himself , " I have done nothing wrong .
Have I killed anyone , or insulted or wished harm to anyone ?
Why such a terrible misfortune ?
And when did it begin ?
Such a little while ago I came to this table with the thought of winning a hundred rubles to buy that casket for Mamma 's name day and then going home .
I was so happy , so free , so lighthearted !
And I did not realize how happy I was !
When did that end and when did this new , terrible state of things begin ?
What marked the change ?
I sat all the time in this same place at this table , chose and placed cards , and watched those broad - boned agile hands in the same way .
When did it happen and what has happened ?
I am well and strong and still the same and in the same place .
No , it ca n't be !
Surely it will all end in nothing ! "
He was flushed and bathed in perspiration , though the room was not hot .
His face was terrible and piteous to see , especially from its helpless efforts to seem calm .
The score against him reached the fateful sum of forty - three thousand .
" Supper , it 's time for supper !
And here are the gypsies ! "
Some swarthy men and women were really entering from the cold outside and saying something in their gypsy accents .
Nicholas understood that it was all over ; but he said in an indifferent tone :
" Well , wo n't you go on ?
I had a splendid card all ready , " as if it were the fun of the game which interested him most .
" It 's all up !
I 'm lost ! "
thought he . "
Now a bullet through my brain - that 's all that 's left me ! "
And at the same time he said in a cheerful voice :
" Come now , just this one more little card ! "
" All right ! " said D'olokhov , having finished the addition .
"
All right !
Twenty - one rubles , " he said , pointing to the figure twenty - one by which the total exceeded the round sum of forty - three thousand ; and taking up a pack he prepared to deal .
Rost'ov submissively unbent the corner of his card and , instead of the six thousand he had intended , carefully wrote twenty - one .
" It 's all the same to me , " he said .
" I only want to see whether you will let me win this ten , or beat it . "
D'olokhov began to deal seriously .
Oh , how Rost'ov detested at that moment those hands with their short reddish fingers and hairy wrists , which held him in their power ....
The ten fell to him .
" You owe forty - three thousand , Count , " said D'olokhov , and stretching himself he rose from the table .
" One does get tired sitting so long , " he added .
" Yes , I 'm tired too , " said Rost'ov .
D'olokhov cut him short , as if to remind him that it was not for him to jest .
" When am I to receive the money , Count ? "
Rost'ov , flushing , drew D'olokhov into the next room .
" I can not pay it all immediately .
Will you take an I.O.U. ? " he said .
" I say , Rost'ov , " said D'olokhov clearly , smiling and looking Nicholas straight in the eyes , " you know the saying , ' Lucky in love , unlucky at cards . '
Your cousin is in love with you , I know . "
" Oh , it 's terrible to feel oneself so in this man 's power , " thought Rost'ov .
" Your cousin ... " D'olokhov started to say , but Nicholas interrupted him .
" My cousin has nothing to do with this
and it 's not necessary to mention her ! "
he exclaimed fiercely .
" Then when am I to have it ? "
" Tomorrow , " replied Rost'ov and left the room .
CHAPTER XV
At home , they had not yet gone to bed .
The young people , after returning from the theater , had had supper and were grouped round the clavichord .
S'onya and Nat'asha , in the light - blue dresses they had worn at the theater , looking pretty and conscious of it , were standing by the clavichord , happy and smiling .
V'era was playing chess with Shinsh'in in the drawing room .
The old countess , waiting for the return of her husband and son , sat playing patience with the old gentlewoman who lived in their house .
Enchantress , say , to my forsaken lyre
What magic power is this recalls me still ?
What spark has set my inmost soul on fire , What is this bliss that makes my fingers thrill ?
He was singing in passionate tones , gazing with his sparkling black - agate eyes at the frightened and happy Nat'asha .
" Splendid !
Excellent ! "
exclaimed Nat'asha . "
Another verse , " she said , without noticing Nicholas .
" Everything 's still the same with them , " thought Nicholas , glancing into the drawing room , where he saw V'era and his mother with the old lady .
" Ah , and here 's Nicholas ! "
cried Nat'asha , running up to him .
" Is Papa at home ? " he asked .
" I am so glad you 've come ! " said Nat'asha , without answering him .
" We are enjoying ourselves !
Vas'ili
Dm'itrich is staying a day longer for my sake !
Did you know ? "
" No , Papa is not back yet , " said S'onya .
" Nicholas , have you come ?
Come here , dear ! "
called the old countess from the drawing room .
Nicholas went to her , kissed her hand , and sitting down silently at her table began to watch her hands arranging the cards .
From the dancing room , they still heard the laughter and merry voices trying to persuade Nat'asha to sing .
" All wight !
All wight ! " shouted Den'isov .
" It 's no good making excuses now !
It 's your turn to sing the ba'cawolla - I entweat you ! "
The countess glanced at her silent son .
" What is the matter ? " she asked .
" Oh , nothing , " said he , as if weary of being continually asked the same question .
" Will Papa be back soon ? "
" I expect so . "
" Everything 's the same with them .
They know nothing about it !
Where am I to go ?
" thought Nicholas , and went again into the dancing room where the clavichord stood .
S'onya was sitting at the clavichord , playing the prelude to Den'isov 's favorite barcarolle .
Nat'asha was preparing to sing .
Den'isov was looking at her with enraptured eyes .
Nicholas began pacing up and down the room .
" Why do they want to make her sing ?
How can she sing ?
There 's nothing to be happy about ! " thought he .
S'onya struck the first chord of the prelude .
" My God , I 'm a ruined and dishonored man !
A bullet through my brain is the only thing left me - not singing ! "
his thoughts ran on . "
Go away ?
But where to ?
It 's one - let them sing ! "
He continued to pace the room , looking gloomily at Den'isov and the girls and avoiding their eyes .
" Nik'olenka , what is the matter ? " S'onya 's eyes fixed on him seemed to ask .
She noticed at once that something had happened to him .
Nicholas turned away from her .
Nat'asha too ,
with her quick instinct , had instantly noticed her brother 's condition .
" Now , S'onya ! "
she said , going to the very middle of the room , where she considered the resonance was best .
Having lifted her head and let her arms droop lifelessly , as ballet dancers do , Nat'asha , rising energetically from her heels to her toes , stepped to the middle of the room and stood still .
" Yes , that 's me ! "
she seemed to say , answering the rapt gaze with which Den'isov followed her .
" And what is she so pleased about ? " thought Nicholas , looking at his sister . "
Why is n't she dull and ashamed ? "
Nat'asha took the first note , her throat swelled , her chest rose , her eyes became serious .
Nat'asha , that winter , had for the first time begun to sing seriously , mainly because Den'isov so delighted in her singing .
"
Only they generally said this some time after she had finished singing .
While that untrained voice , with its incorrect breathing and labored transitions , was sounding , even the connoisseurs said nothing , but only delighted in it and wished to hear it again .
" What is this ? "
thought Nicholas , listening to her with widely opened eyes .
" What has happened to her ?
How she is singing today ! "
And suddenly the whole world centered for him on anticipation of the next note , the next phrase , and everything in the world was divided into three beats : "
Oh mio crudele affetto . " ...
One , two , three ... one , two ,
three ...
One ...
" Oh mio crudele affetto . " ...
One , two , three ... One . "
Oh , this senseless life of ours ! " thought Nicholas .
" All this misery , and money , and D'olokhov , and anger , and honor -
it 's all nonsense ...
but this is real ....
Now then , Nat'asha , now then , dearest !
Now then , darling !
How will she take that si ?
She 's taken it !
Thank God ! "
And without noticing that he was singing , to strengthen the si he sung a second , a third below the high note . "
Ah , God !
How fine !
Did I really take it ?
How fortunate !
" he thought .
Oh , how that chord vibrated , and how moved was something that was finest in Rost'ov 's soul !
And this something was apart from everything else in the world and above everything in the world .
" What were losses , and D'olokhov , and words of honor ? ...
All nonsense !
One might kill and rob and yet be happy .... "
CHAPTER XVI
It was long since Rost'ov had felt such enjoyment from music as he did that day .
But no sooner had Nat'asha finished her barcarolle than reality again presented itself .
He got up without saying a word and went downstairs to his own room .
A quarter of an hour later the old count came in from his club , cheerful and contented .
Nicholas , hearing him drive up , went to meet him .
" Well - had a good time ? " said the old count , smiling gaily and proudly at his son .
Nicholas tried to say " Yes , " but could not : and he nearly burst into sobs .
The count was lighting his pipe and did not notice his son 's condition .
" Ah , it ca n't be avoided ! " thought Nicholas , for the first and last time .
And suddenly , in the most casual tone , which made him feel ashamed of himself , he said , as if merely asking his father to let him have the carriage to drive to town :
" Papa , I have come on a matter of business .
I was nearly forgetting .
I need some money . "
" Dear me ! " said his father , who was in a specially good humor .
" I told you it would not be enough .
How much ? "
" What !
To whom ? ...
Nonsense ! "
cried the count , suddenly reddening with an apoplectic flush over neck and nape as old people do .
" I promised to pay tomorrow , " said Nicholas .
" Well ! ... " said the old count , spreading out his arms and sinking helplessly on the sofa .
" It ca n't be helped !
He longed to kiss his father 's hands and kneel to beg his forgiveness , but said , in a careless and even rude voice , that it happens to everyone !
The old count cast down his eyes on hearing his son 's words and began bustlingly searching for something .
" Yes , yes , " he muttered , " it will be difficult , I fear , difficult to raise ... happens to everybody !
Yes , who has not done it ? "
And with a furtive glance at his son 's face , the count went out of the room ....
Nicholas had been prepared for resistance , but had not at all expected this .
" Papa ! Pa - pa ! " he called after him , sobbing , " forgive me ! "
And seizing his father 's hand , he pressed it to his lips and burst into tears .
While father and son were having their explanation , the mother and daughter were having one not less important .
Nat'asha came running to her mother , quite excited .
" Mamma ! ...
Mamma ! ...
He has made me ... "
" Made what ? "
" Made , made me an offer , Mamma !
Mamma !
" she exclaimed .
The countess did not believe her ears .
Den'isov had proposed .
To whom ?
To this chit of a girl , Nat'asha , who not so long ago was playing with dolls and who was still having lessons .
" Do n't , Nat'asha !
What nonsense !
" she said , hoping it was a joke .
" Nonsense , indeed !
I am telling you the fact , " said Nat'asha indignantly .
" I come to ask you what to do , and you call it ' nonsense ! ' "
The countess shrugged her shoulders .
" If it is true that Monsieur Den'isov has made you a proposal , tell him he is a fool , that 's all ! "
" No , he 's not a fool ! "
replied Nat'asha indignantly and seriously .
" Well then , what do you want ?
You 're all in love nowadays .
Well , if you are in love , marry him ! "
said the countess , with a laugh of annoyance .
"
Good luck to you ! "
" No , Mamma , I 'm not in love with him , I suppose I 'm not in love with him . "
" Well then , tell him so . "
" Mamma , are you cross ?
Do n't be cross , dear !
Is it my fault ? "
" No , but what is it , my dear ?
Do you want me to go and tell him ? " said the countess smiling .
" No , I will do it myself , only tell me what to say .
It 's all very well for you , " said Nat'asha , with a responsive smile .
" You should have seen how he said it !
I know he did not mean to say it , but it came out accidently . "
" Well , all the same , you must refuse him . "
" No , I must n't .
I am so sorry for him !
He 's so nice . "
" Well then , accept his offer .
It 's high time for you to be married , " answered the countess sharply and sarcastically .
" No , Mamma , but I 'm so sorry for him .
I do n't know how I 'm to say it . "
" And there 's nothing for you to say .
I shall speak to him myself , " said the countess , indignant that they should have dared to treat this little Nat'asha as grown up .
" No , not on any account !
He jumped up at the sound of her light step .
" Nataly , " he said , moving with rapid steps toward her , " decide my fate .
It is in your hands . "
" Vas'ili Dm'itrich , I 'm so sorry for you ! ...
No ,
but you are so nice ...
but it wo n't do ... not that ...
but as a friend , I shall always love you . "
Den'isov bent over her hand and she heard strange sounds she did not understand .
She kissed his rough curly black head .
At this instant , they heard the quick rustle of the countess ' dress .
She came up to them .
" Vas'ili Dm'itrich , I thank you for the honor , " she said , with an embarrassed voice , though it sounded severe to Den'isov-"but
my daughter is so young , and I thought that , as my son 's friend , you would have addressed yourself first to me .
In that case you would not have obliged me to give this refusal . "
" Countess ... " said Den'isov , with downcast eyes and a guilty face .
He tried to say more , but faltered .
Nat'asha could not remain calm , seeing him in such a plight .
She began to sob aloud .
Next day Rost'ov saw Den'isov off .
He did not wish to stay another day in Moscow .
S'onya was more tender and devoted to him than ever .
It was as if she wanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that made her love him all the more , but Nicholas now considered himself unworthy of her .
BOOK FIVE : 1806 - 07
CHAPTER I
After his interview with his wife Pierre left for Petersburg .
At the Torzh'ok post station , either there were no horses or the postmaster would not supply them .
Pierre was obliged to wait .
Without undressing , he lay down on the leather sofa in front of a round table , put his big feet in their overboots on the table , and began to reflect .
" Will you have the portmanteaus brought in ?
And a bed got ready , and tea ?
" asked his valet .
Pierre gave no answer , for he neither heard nor saw anything .
He had begun to think of the last station and was still pondering on the same question - one so important that he took no notice of what went on around him .
The postmaster , his wife , the valet , and a peasant woman selling Torzh'ok embroidery came into the room offering their services .
Without changing his careless attitude , Pierre looked at them over his spectacles unable to understand what they wanted or how they could go on living without having solved the problems that so absorbed him .
He had been engrossed by the same thoughts ever since the day he returned from Sok'olniki after the duel and had spent that first agonizing , sleepless night .
But now , in the solitude of the journey , they seized him with special force .
No matter what he thought about , he always returned to these same questions which he could not solve and yet could not cease to ask himself .
It was as if the thread of the chief screw which held his life together were stripped , so that the screw could not get in or out , but went on turning uselessly in the same place .
The postmaster came in and began obsequiously to beg his excellency to wait only two hours , when , come what might , he would let his excellency have the courier horses .
It was plain that he was lying and only wanted to get more money from the traveler .
" Is this good or bad ? "
Pierre asked himself .
But the officer thrashed him because he had to get on as quickly as possible .
What is bad ?
What is good ?
What should one love and what hate ?
What does one live for ?
And what am I ?
What is life , and what is death ?
What power governs all ? "
There was no answer to any of these questions , except one , and that not a logical answer and not at all a reply to them .
The answer was : " You 'll die and all will end .
You 'll die and know all , or cease asking . "
But dying was also dreadful .
The Torzh'ok peddler woman , in a whining voice , went on offering her wares , especially a pair of goatskin slippers .
" I have hundreds of rubles I do n't know what to do with , and she stands in her tattered cloak looking timidly at me , " he thought .
" And what does she want the money for ?
As if that money could add a hair 's breadth to happiness or peace of mind .
Can anything in the world make her or me less a prey to evil and death ?-
death which ends all and must come today or tomorrow - at any rate , in an instant as compared with eternity . "
And again he twisted the screw with the stripped thread , and again it turned uselessly in the same place .
His servant handed him a half - cut novel , in the form of letters , by Madame de Souza .
He began reading about the sufferings and virtuous struggles of a certain Emilie de Mansfeld . "
And why did she resist her seducer when she loved him ? "
he thought .
" God could not have put into her heart an impulse that was against His will .
My wife - as she once was - did not struggle , and perhaps she was right .
Nothing has been found out , nothing discovered , " Pierre again said to himself . "
All we can know is that we know nothing .
And that 's the height of human wisdom . "
Everything within and around him seemed confused , senseless , and repellent .
Yet in this very repugnance to all his circumstances Pierre found a kind of tantalizing satisfaction .
" I make bold to ask your excellency to move a little for this gentleman , " said the postmaster , entering the room followed by another traveler , also detained for lack of horses .
The newcomer was a short , large - boned , yellow - faced , wrinkled old man , with gray bushy eyebrows overhanging bright eyes of an indefinite grayish color .
The stern , shrewd , and penetrating expression of that look struck Pierre .
He felt a wish to speak to the stranger , but by the time he had made up his mind to ask him a question about the roads , the traveler had closed his eyes .
His shriveled old hands were folded and on the finger of one of them Pierre noticed a large cast iron ring with a seal representing a death 's head .
The stranger sat without stirring , either resting or , as it seemed to Pierre , sunk in profound and calm meditation .
His servant was also a yellow , wrinkled old man , without beard or mustache , evidently not because he was shaven but because they had never grown .
This active old servant was unpacking the traveler 's canteen and preparing tea .
He brought in a boiling samovar .
When everything was ready , the stranger opened his eyes , moved to the table , filled a tumbler with tea for himself and one for the beardless old man to whom he passed it .
Pierre began to feel a sense of uneasiness , and the need , even the inevitability , of entering into conversation with this stranger .
The servant brought back his tumbler turned upside down , * with an unfinished bit of nibbled sugar , and asked if anything more would be wanted .
* To indicate he did not want more tea .
" No . Give me the book , " said the stranger .
The servant handed him a book which Pierre took to be a devotional work , and the traveler became absorbed in it .
Pierre looked at him .
All at once the stranger closed the book , putting in a marker , and again , leaning with his arms on the back of the sofa , sat in his former position with his eyes shut .
Pierre looked at him and had not time to turn away when the old man , opening his eyes , fixed his steady and severe gaze straight on Pierre 's face .
Pierre felt confused and wished to avoid that look , but the bright old eyes attracted him irresistibly .
CHAPTER II
" I have the pleasure of addressing Count Bez'ukhov , if I am not mistaken , " said the stranger in a deliberate and loud voice .
Pierre looked silently and inquiringly at him over his spectacles .
" I have heard of you , my dear sir , " continued the stranger , " and of your misfortune .
"
He seemed to emphasize the last word , as if to say-"Yes , misfortune !
Call it what you please
, I know that what happened to you in Moscow was a misfortune."-"I regret
it very much , my dear sir . "
Pierre flushed and , hurriedly putting his legs down from the bed , bent forward toward the old man with a forced and timid smile .
" I have not referred to this out of curiosity , my dear sir , but for greater reasons . "
He paused , his gaze still on Pierre , and moved aside on the sofa by way of inviting the other to take a seat beside him .
Pierre felt reluctant to enter into conversation with this old man , but , submitting to him involuntarily , came up and sat down beside him .
" You are unhappy , my dear sir , " the stranger continued .
" You are young and I am old .
I should like to help you as far as lies in my power . "
" Oh , yes ! " said Pierre , with a forced smile .
" I am very grateful to you .
Where are you traveling from ? "
The stranger 's face was not genial , it was even cold and severe , but in spite of this , both the face and words of his new acquaintance were irresistibly attractive to Pierre .
" But if for any reason you do n't feel inclined to talk to me , " said the old man , " say so , my dear sir . "
And he suddenly smiled , in an unexpected and tenderly paternal way .
" Oh no , not at all !
On the contrary , I am very glad to make your acquaintance , " said Pierre .
And again , glancing at the stranger 's hands , he looked more closely at the ring , with its skull - a Masonic sign .
" Allow me to ask , " he said , " are you a Mason ? "
" Yes , I belong to the Brotherhood of the Freemasons , " said the stranger , looking deeper and deeper into Pierre 's eyes . "
And in their name and my own I hold out a brotherly hand to you . "
I am afraid my way of looking at the world is so opposed to yours that we shall not understand one another . "
Forgive me , my dear sir , but if I had not known it I should not have addressed you .
Your view of life is a regrettable delusion . "
" Just as I may suppose you to be deluded , " said Pierre , with a faint smile .
" I should never dare to say that I know the truth , " said the Mason , whose words struck Pierre more and more by their precision and firmness .
" No one can attain to truth by himself .
" I ought to tell you that I do not believe ... do not believe in God , " said Pierre , regretfully and with an effort , feeling it essential to speak the whole truth .
" Yes , you do not know Him , my dear sir , " said the Mason .
" You can not know Him .
You do not know Him and that is why you are unhappy . "
" Yes , yes , I am unhappy , " assented Pierre . "
But what am I to do ? "
" You know Him not , my dear sir , and so you are very unhappy .
You do not know Him , but He is here
, He is in me ,
He is in my words , He is in thee , and even in those blasphemous words thou hast just uttered ! " pronounced the Mason in a stern and tremulous voice .
He paused and sighed , evidently trying to calm himself .
" If He were not , " he said quietly , " you and I would not be speaking of Him , my dear sir .
Of what , of whom , are we speaking ?
Whom hast thou denied ?
" he suddenly asked with exulting austerity and authority in his voice . "
Who invented Him , if He did not exist ?
Whence came thy conception of the existence of such an incomprehensible Being ?
didst thou , and why did the whole world , conceive the idea of the existence of such an incomprehensible Being , a Being all - powerful , eternal , and infinite in all His attributes ? ... "
He stopped and remained silent for a long time .
Pierre could not and did not wish to break this silence .
He paused again .
"
Who art thou ?
Thou dreamest that thou art wise because thou couldst utter those blasphemous words
, " he went on , with a somber and scornful smile . "
To know Him is hard ....
Pierre listened with swelling heart , gazing into the Mason 's face with shining eyes , not interrupting or questioning him , but believing with his whole soul what the stranger said .
" He is not to be apprehended by reason , but by life , " said the Mason .
" I do not understand , " said Pierre , feeling with dismay doubts reawakening .
He was afraid of any want of clearness , any weakness , in the Mason 's arguments ; he dreaded not to be able to believe in him .
" I do n't understand , " he said , " how it is that the mind of man can not attain the knowledge of which you speak . "
The Mason smiled with his gentle fatherly smile .
" The highest wisdom and truth are like the purest liquid we may wish to imbibe , " he said .
" Can I receive that pure liquid into an impure vessel and judge of its purity ?
Only by the inner purification of myself can I retain in some degree of purity the liquid I receive . "
" Yes , yes , that is so , " said Pierre joyfully .
" The highest wisdom is not founded on reason alone , not on those worldly sciences of physics , history , chemistry , and the like , into which intellectual knowledge is divided .
The highest wisdom is one .
The highest wisdom has but one science - the science of the whole - the science explaining the whole creation and man 's place in it .
To receive that science it is necessary to purify and renew one 's inner self , and so before one can know , it is necessary to believe and to perfect one 's self .
And to attain this end , we have the light called conscience that God has implanted in our souls . "
" Yes , yes , " assented Pierre .
" Look then at thy inner self with the eyes of the spirit , and ask thyself whether thou art content with thyself .
What hast thou attained relying on reason only ?
What art thou ?
You are young , you are rich , you are clever , you are well educated .
And what have you done with all these good gifts ?
Are you content with yourself and with your life ? "
" No , I hate my life , " Pierre muttered , wincing .
" Thou hatest it .
Then change it , purify thyself ; and as thou art purified , thou wilt gain wisdom .
Look at your life , my dear sir .
How have you spent it ?
In riotous orgies and debauchery , receiving everything from society and giving nothing in return .
You have become the possessor of wealth .
How have you used it ?
What have you done for your neighbor ?
Have you ever thought of your tens of thousands of slaves ?
Have you helped them physically and morally ?
No !
You have profited by their toil to lead a profligate life .
That is what you have done .
Have you chosen a post in which you might be of service to your neighbor ?
No !
You have spent your life in idleness .
Then you married , my dear sir - took on yourself responsibility for the guidance of a young woman ; and what have you done ?
You have not helped her to find the way of truth , my dear sir , but have thrust her into an abyss of deceit and misery .
A man offended you and you shot him , and you say you do not know God and hate your life .
There is nothing strange in that , my dear sir ! "
After these words , the Mason , as if tired by his long discourse , again leaned his arms on the back of the sofa and closed his eyes .
Pierre looked at that aged , stern , motionless , almost lifeless face and moved his lips without uttering a sound .
He wished to say , " Yes , a vile , idle , vicious life ! "
but dared not break the silence .
The Mason cleared his throat huskily , as old men do , and called his servant .
" How about the horses ? " he asked , without looking at Pierre .
" The exchange horses have just come , " answered the servant .
" Will you not rest here ? "
" No , tell them to harness . "
Yes , I never thought of it , but I have led a contemptible and profligate life , though I did not like it and did not want to , " thought Pierre . "
But this man knows the truth and , if he wished to , could disclose it to me . "
Pierre wished to say this to the Mason , but did not dare to .
The traveler , having packed his things with his practiced hands , began fastening his coat .
When he had finished , he turned to Bez'ukhov , and said in a tone of indifferent politeness :
" Where are you going to now , my dear sir ? "
" I ?
... I 'm going to Petersburg , " answered Pierre , in a childlike , hesitating voice .
" I thank you .
I agree with all you have said .
But do not suppose me to be so bad .
With my whole soul I wish to be what you would have me be , but I have never had help from anyone ....
But it is I , above all , who am to blame for everything .
Help me , teach me , and perhaps I may ... "
Pierre could not go on .
He gulped and turned away .
The Mason remained silent for a long time , evidently considering .
" Help comes from God alone , " he said , " but such measure of help as our Order can bestow it will render you , my dear sir .
You are going to Petersburg .
Hand this to Count Willarski "
( he took out his notebook and wrote a few words on a large sheet of paper folded in four ) . "
Allow me to give you a piece of advice .
When you reach the capital , first of all devote some time to solitude and self - examination and do not resume your former way of life .
And now I wish you a good journey , my dear sir , " he added , seeing that his servant had entered ... " and success . "
The traveler was Joseph Alex'eevich Bazd'eev , as Pierre saw from the postmaster 's book .
Bazd'eev had been one of the best - known Freemasons and Martinists , even in Nov'ikov 's time .
It seemed to him that he had been vicious only because he had somehow forgotten how good it is to be virtuous .
Not a trace of his former doubts remained in his soul .
He firmly believed in the possibility of the brotherhood of men united in the aim of supporting one another in the path of virtue , and that is how Freemasonry presented itself to him .
CHAPTER III
On reaching Petersburg Pierre did not let anyone know of his arrival , he went nowhere and spent whole days in reading Thomas ` a Kempis , whose book had been sent him by someone unknown .
" I have come to you with a message and an offer , Count , " he said without sitting down .
" A person of very high standing in our Brotherhood has made application for you to be received into our Order before the usual term and has proposed to me to be your sponsor .
I consider it a sacred duty to fulfill that person 's wishes .
Do you wish to enter the Brotherhood of Freemasons under my sponsorship ? "
The cold , austere tone of this man , whom he had almost always before met at balls , amiably smiling in the society of the most brilliant women , surprised Pierre .
" Yes , I do wish it , " said he .
Willarski bowed his head .
Pierre considered .
" Yes ... yes , I believe in God , " he said .
" In that case ... " began Willarski , but Pierre interrupted him .
" Yes , I do believe in God , " he repeated .
" In that case we can go , " said Willarski .
" My carriage is at your service . "
Willarski was silent throughout the drive .
To Pierre 's inquiries as to what he must do and how he should answer , Willarski only replied that brothers more worthy than he would test him and that Pierre had only to tell the truth .
From there they passed into another room .
A man in strange attire appeared at the door .
Willarski , stepping toward him , said something to him in French in an undertone and then went up to a small wardrobe in which Pierre noticed garments such as he had never seen before .
Having taken a kerchief from the cupboard , Willarski bound Pierre 's eyes with it and tied it in a knot behind , catching some hairs painfully in the knot .
Then he drew his face down , kissed him , and taking him by the hand led him forward .
The hairs tied in the knot hurt Pierre and there were lines of pain on his face and a shamefaced smile .
His huge figure , with arms hanging down and with a puckered , though smiling face , moved after Willarski with uncertain , timid steps .
Having led him about ten paces , Willarski stopped .
" Whatever happens to you , " he said , " you must bear it all manfully if you have firmly resolved to join our Brotherhood . "
( Pierre nodded affirmatively . )
" When you hear a knock at the door , you will uncover your eyes , " added Willarski .
" I wish you courage and success , " and , pressing Pierre 's hand , he went out .
Left alone , Pierre went on smiling in the same way .
Once or twice he shrugged his shoulders and raised his hand to the kerchief , as if wishing to take it off , but let it drop again .
The five minutes spent with his eyes bandaged seemed to him an hour .
His arms felt numb , his legs almost gave way , it seemed to him that he was tired out .
He experienced a variety of most complex sensations .
He felt afraid of what would happen to him and still more afraid of showing his fear .
Loud knocks were heard at the door .
Pierre took the bandage off his eyes and glanced around him .
The room was in black darkness , only a small lamp was burning inside something white .
Pierre went nearer and saw that the lamp stood on a black table on which lay an open book .
The book was the Gospel , and the white thing with the lamp inside was a human skull with its cavities and teeth .
After reading the first words of the Gospel : " In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God , " Pierre went round the table and saw a large open box filled with something .
It was a coffin with bones inside .
He was not at all surprised by what he saw .
Hoping to enter on an entirely new life quite unlike the old one , he expected everything to be unusual , even more unusual than what he was seeing .
A skull , a coffin ,
the Gospel - it seemed to him that he had expected all this and even more .
Trying to stimulate his emotions he looked around . "
God , death , love , the brotherhood of man , " he kept saying to himself , associating these words with vague yet joyful ideas .
The door opened and someone came in .
By the dim light , to which Pierre had already become accustomed , he saw a rather short man .
Having evidently come from the light into the darkness , the man paused , then moved with cautious steps toward the table and placed on it his small leather - gloved hands .
" For what have you come hither ? " asked the newcomer , turning in Pierre 's direction at a slight rustle made by the latter . "
Why have you , who do not believe in the truth of the light and who have not seen the light , come here ?
What do you seek from us ?
Wisdom , virtue , enlightenment ? "
With bated breath and beating heart he moved toward the Rhetor ( by which name the brother who prepared a seeker for entrance into the Brotherhood was known ) .
Drawing nearer , he recognized in the Rhetor a man he knew , Smolyan'inov , and it mortified him to think that the newcomer was an acquaintance - he wished him simply a brother and a virtuous instructor .
For a long time he could not utter a word , so that the Rhetor had to repeat his question .
" Yes ... I ...
I ... desire regeneration , "
Pierre uttered with difficulty .
" Very well , " said Smolyan'inov , and went on at once : "
Have you any idea of the means by which our holy Order will help you to reach your aim ? " said he quietly and quickly .
" What is your conception of Freemasonry ? "
" I imagine that Freemasonry is the fraternity and equality of men who have virtuous aims , " said Pierre , feeling ashamed of the inadequacy of his words for the solemnity of the moment , as he spoke .
" I imagine ... "
" Good ! " said the Rhetor quickly , apparently satisfied with this answer .
" Have you sought for means of attaining your aim in religion ? "
" No , I considered it erroneous and did not follow it , " said Pierre , so softly that the Rhetor did not hear him and asked him what he was saying .
" I have been an atheist , " answered Pierre .
" You are seeking for truth in order to follow its laws in your life , therefore you seek wisdom and virtue .
Is that not so ? " said the Rhetor , after a moment 's pause .
" Yes , yes , " assented Pierre .
The Rhetor cleared his throat , crossed his gloved hands on his breast , and began to speak .
" Now I must disclose to you the chief aim of our Order , " he said , " and if this aim coincides with yours , you may enter our Brotherhood with profit .
But since this mystery is of such a nature that nobody can know or use it unless he be prepared by long and diligent self - purification , not everyone can hope to attain it quickly .
Think this over
and I will come to you again . "
" To combat the evil which sways the world ... " Pierre repeated , and a mental image of his future activity in this direction rose in his mind .
He imagined men such as he had himself been a fortnight ago , and he addressed an edifying exhortation to them .
He imagined to himself vicious and unfortunate people whom he would assist by word and deed , imagined oppressors whose victims he would rescue .
Of the three objects mentioned by the Rhetor , this last , that of improving mankind , especially appealed to Pierre .
Half an hour later , the Rhetor returned to inform the seeker of the seven virtues , corresponding to the seven steps of Solomon 's temple , which every Freemason should cultivate in himself .
These virtues were : 1 .
Discretion , the keeping of the secrets of the Order .
2 .
Obedience to those of higher ranks in the Order .
3 .
Morality .
4 .
Love of mankind .
5 .
Courage .
6 .
Generosity .
7 .
The love of death .
" Yes , that must be so , " thought Pierre , when after these words the Rhetor went away , leaving him to solitary meditation .
" It must be so , but I am still so weak that I love my life , the meaning of which is only now gradually opening before me . "
( He now felt so glad to be free from his own lawlessness and to submit his will to those who knew the indubitable truth . )
He forgot what the seventh virtue was and could not recall it .
The third time the Rhetor came back more quickly and asked Pierre whether he was still firm in his intention and determined to submit to all that would be required of him .
" I am ready for everything , " said Pierre .
This chamber with what you see therein should already have suggested to your heart , if it is sincere , more than words could do .
You will perhaps also see in your further initiation a like method of enlightenment .
Our Order imitates the ancient societies that explained their teaching by hieroglyphics .
A hieroglyph , " said the Rhetor , " is an emblem of something not cognizable by the senses but which possesses qualities resembling those of the symbol . "
Pierre knew very well what a hieroglyph was , but dared not speak .
He listened to the Rhetor in silence , feeling from all he said that his ordeal was about to begin .
" If you are resolved , I must begin your initiation , " said the Rhetor coming closer to Pierre . "
In token of generosity I ask you to give me all your valuables . "
" But I have nothing here , " replied Pierre , supposing that he was asked to give up all he possessed .
" What you have with you : watch , money , rings .... "
Pierre quickly took out his purse and watch , but could not manage for some time to get the wedding ring off his fat finger .
When that had been done , the Rhetor said :
" In token of obedience , I ask you to undress . "
Pierre took off his coat , waistcoat , and left boot according to the Rhetor 's instructions .
The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre 's left breast , and stooping down pulled up the left leg of his trousers to above the knee .
" And now , in token of candor , I ask you to reveal to me your chief passion , " said the latter .
" My passion !
I have had so many , " replied Pierre .
" That passion which more than all others caused you to waver on the path of virtue , " said the Mason .
Pierre paused , seeking a reply .
" Wine ?
Gluttony ?
Idleness ?
Laziness ?
Irritability ?
Anger ?
Women ? "
He went over his vices in his mind , not knowing to which of them to give the pre - eminence .
" Women , " he said in a low , scarcely audible voice .
The Mason did not move and for a long time said nothing after this answer .
At last he moved up to Pierre and , taking the kerchief that lay on the table , again bound his eyes .
" For the last time I say to you - turn all your attention upon yourself , put a bridle on your senses , and seek blessedness , not in passion but in your own heart .
The source of blessedness is not without us but within .... "
Pierre had already long been feeling in himself that refreshing source of blessedness which now flooded his heart with glad emotion .
CHAPTER IV
Soon after this there came into the dark chamber to fetch Pierre , not the Rhetor but Pierre 's sponsor , Willarski , whom he recognized by his voice .
He was conducted from that room along passages that turned backwards and forwards and was at last brought to the doors of the Lodge .
Willarski coughed , he was answered by the Masonic knock with mallets , the doors opened before them .
A bass voice ( Pierre was still blindfolded ) questioned him as to who he was , when and where he was born , and so on .
As he was being led up to some object he noticed a hesitation and uncertainty among his conductors .
He heard those around him disputing in whispers and one of them insisting that he should be led along a certain carpet .
The candles were then extinguished and some spirit lighted , as Pierre knew by the smell , and he was told that he would now see the lesser light .
Among them stood a man whose white shirt was stained with blood .
On seeing this , Pierre moved forward with his breast toward the swords , meaning them to pierce it .
But the swords were drawn back from him and he was at once blindfolded again .
" Now thou hast seen the lesser light , " uttered a voice .
Then the candles were relit and he was told that he would see the full light ; the bandage was again removed and more than ten voices said together : " Sic transit gloria mundi . "
Pierre gradually began to recover himself and looked about at the room and at the people in it .
Round a long table covered with black sat some twelve men in garments like those he had already seen .
Some of them Pierre had met in Petersburg society .
In the President 's chair sat a young man he did not know , with a peculiar cross hanging from his neck .
On his right sat the Italian abb'e whom Pierre had met at Anna P'avlovna 's two years before .
There were also present a very distinguished dignitary and a Swiss who had formerly been tutor at the Kur'agins ' .
All maintained a solemn silence , listening to the words of the President , who held a mallet in his hand .
Let into the wall was a star - shaped light .
At one side of the table was a small carpet with various figures worked upon it , at the other was something resembling an altar on which lay a Testament and a skull .
Round it stood seven large candlesticks like those used in churches .
Two of the brothers led Pierre up to the altar , placed his feet at right angles , and bade him lie down , saying that he must prostrate himself at the Gates of the Temple .
" He must first receive the trowel , " whispered one of the brothers .
" Oh , hush , please ! " said another .
Pierre , perplexed , looked round with his shortsighted eyes without obeying , and suddenly doubts arose in his mind .
" Where am I ?
What am I doing ?
Are n't they laughing at me ?
Sha n't I be ashamed to remember this ? "
But these doubts only lasted a moment .
Pierre glanced at the serious faces of those around , remembered all he had already gone through , and realized that he could not stop halfway .
He was aghast at his hesitation and , trying to arouse his former devotional feeling , prostrated himself before the Gates of the Temple .
And really , the feeling of devotion returned to him even more strongly than before .
When he had lain there some time , he was told to get up , and a white leather apron , such as the others wore , was put on him :
he was given a trowel and three pairs of gloves , and then the Grand Master addressed him .
As to the first pair of gloves , a man 's , he said that Pierre could not know their meaning but must keep them .
Give them to the woman whom you shall honor most of all .
This gift will be a pledge of your purity of heart to her whom you select to be your worthy helpmeet in Masonry . "
And after a pause , he added : " But beware , dear brother , that these gloves do not deck hands that are unclean . "
While the Grand Master said these last words it seemed to Pierre that he grew embarrassed .
Pierre himself grew still more confused , blushed like a child till tears came to his eyes , began looking about him uneasily , and an awkward pause followed .
Then a place was assigned to Pierre , he was shown the signs of the Lodge , told the password , and at last was permitted to sit down .
The Grand Master began reading the statutes .
They were very long , and Pierre , from joy , agitation , and embarrassment , was not in a state to understand what was being read .
He managed to follow only the last words of the statutes and these remained in his mind .
" In our temples we recognize no other distinctions , " read the Grand Master , " but those between virtue and vice .
Beware of making any distinctions which may infringe equality .
Fly to a brother 's aid whoever he may be , exhort him who goeth astray , raise him that falleth , never bear malice or enmity toward thy brother .
Be kindly and courteous .
Kindle in all hearts the flame of virtue .
Share thy happiness with thy neighbor , and may envy never dim the purity of that bliss .
Forgive thy enemy , do not avenge thyself except by doing him good .
Thus fulfilling the highest law thou shalt regain traces of the ancient dignity which thou hast lost . "
He acknowledged no acquaintances but saw in all these men only brothers , and burned with impatience to set to work with them .
The Grand Master rapped with his mallet .
All the Masons sat down in their places , and one of them read an exhortation on the necessity of humility .
The Grand Master proposed that the last duty should be performed , and the distinguished dignitary who bore the title of " Collector of Alms " went round to all the brothers .
Pierre would have liked to subscribe all he had , but fearing that it might look like pride subscribed the same amount as the others .
CHAPTER V
Now and then his attention wandered from the book and the Square and he formed in imagination a new plan of life .
On the previous evening at the Lodge , he had heard that a rumor of his duel had reached the Emperor and that it would be wiser for him to leave Petersburg .
Pierre proposed going to his estates in the south and there attending to the welfare of his serfs .
He was joyfully planning this new life , when Prince Vas'ili suddenly entered the room .
" My dear fellow , what have you been up to in Moscow ?
Why have you quarreled with H'el`ene , mon cher ?
You are under a delusion , " said Prince Vas'ili , as he entered .
" I know all about it , and I can tell you positively that H'el`ene is as innocent before you as Christ was before the Jews . "
Pierre was about to reply , but Prince Vas'ili interrupted him .
" And why did n't you simply come straight to me as to a friend ?
I know all about it and understand it all , " he said .
" You behaved as becomes a man who values his honor , perhaps too hastily , but we wo n't go into that .
But consider the position in which you are placing her and me in the eyes of society , and even of the court , " he added , lowering his voice . "
She is living in Moscow and you are here .
Remember , dear boy , " and he drew Pierre 's arm downwards , " it is simply a misunderstanding .
I expect you feel it so yourself .
Prince Vas'ili gave Pierre a significant look .
" I know from reliable sources that the Dowager Empress is taking a keen interest in the whole affair .
You know she is very gracious to H'el`ene . "
Moreover , the words of the Masonic statutes , " be kindly and courteous , " recurred to him .
" Now , dear boy , " said Prince Vas'ili playfully , " say ' yes , ' and I 'll write to her myself , and we will kill the fatted calf . "
But before Prince Vas'ili had finished his playful speech , Pierre , without looking at him , and with a kind of fury that made him like his father , muttered in a whisper :
" Prince , I did not ask you here .
Go , please go ! "
And he jumped up and opened the door for him .
" Go ! " he repeated , amazed at himself and glad to see the look of confusion and fear that showed itself on Prince Vas'ili 's face .
" What 's the matter with you ?
Are you ill ? "
" Go ! "
the quivering voice repeated .
And Prince Vas'ili had to go without receiving any explanation .
A week later , Pierre , having taken leave of his new friends , the Masons , and leaving large sums of money with them for alms , went away to his estates .
His new brethren gave him letters to the Kiev and Odessa Masons and promised to write to him and guide him in his new activity .
CHAPTER VI
The duel between Pierre and D'olokhov was hushed up and , in spite of the Emperor 's severity regarding duels at that time , neither the principals nor their seconds suffered for it .
But the story of the duel , confirmed by Pierre 's rupture with his wife , was the talk of society .
Now he alone was blamed for what had happened , he was said to be insanely jealous and subject like his father to fits of bloodthirsty rage .
And when after Pierre 's departure H'el`ene returned to Petersburg , she was received by all her acquaintances not only cordially , but even with a shade of deference due to her misfortune .
When conversation turned on her husband H'el`ene assumed a dignified expression , which with characteristic tact she had acquired though she did not understand its significance .
This expression suggested that she had resolved to endure her troubles uncomplainingly and that her husband was a cross laid upon her by God .
Prince Vas'ili expressed his opinion more openly .
He shrugged his shoulders when Pierre was mentioned and , pointing to his forehead , remarked :
" A bit touched - I always said so . "
And how has it ended ?
I was against this marriage even then and foretold all that has happened . "
The novelty Anna P'avlovna was setting before her guests that evening was Bor'is Drubetsk'oy , who had just arrived as a special messenger from the Prussian army and was aide - de - camp to a very important personage .
The temperature shown by the political thermometer to the company that evening was this :
" Whatever the European sovereigns and commanders may do to countenance Bonaparte , and to cause me , and us in general , annoyance and mortification , our opinion of Bonaparte can not alter .
We shall not cease to express our sincere views on that subject , and can only say to the King of Prussia and others : ' So much the worse for you .
Tu l'as voulu , George Dandin , ' that 's all we have to say about it ! "
Anna P'avlovna gave him her shriveled hand to kiss and introduced him to several persons whom he did not know , giving him a whispered description of each .
Thanks to Anna Mikh'aylovna 's efforts , his own tastes , and the peculiarities of his reserved nature , Bor'is had managed during his service to place himself very advantageously .
He was aide - de - camp to a very important personage , had been sent on a very important mission to Prussia , and had just returned from there as a special messenger .
In consequence of this discovery his whole manner of life , all his relations with old friends , all his plans for his future , were completely altered .
He made friends with and sought the acquaintance of only those above him in position and who could therefore be of use to him .
He liked Petersburg and despised Moscow .
The remembrance of the Rost'ovs ' house and of his childish love for Nat'asha was unpleasant to him and he had not once been to see the Rost'ovs since the day of his departure for the army .
To be in Anna P'avlovna 's drawing room he considered an important step up in the service , and he at once understood his role , letting his hostess make use of whatever interest he had to offer .
He himself carefully scanned each face , appraising the possibilities of establishing intimacy with each of those present , and the advantages that might accrue .
He took the seat indicated to him beside the fair H'el`ene and listened to the general conversation .
" Vienna considers the bases of the proposed treaty so unattainable that not even a continuity of most brilliant successes would secure them , and she doubts the means we have of gaining them .
That is the actual phrase used by the Vienna cabinet , " said the Danish charg'e d'affaires .
" The doubt is flattering , " said " the man of profound intellect , " with a subtle smile .
" We must distinguish between the Vienna cabinet and the Emperor of Austria , " said Mortemart .
" The Emperor of Austria can never have thought of such a thing , it is only the cabinet that says it . "
* " Europe will never be our sincere ally . "
After that Anna P'avlovna led up to the courage and firmness of the King of Prussia , in order to draw Bor'is into the conversation .
Speaking of the position of Prussia , Anna P'avlovna very naturally asked Bor'is to tell them about his journey to Glogau and in what state he found the Prussian army .
Bor'is , speaking with deliberation , told them in pure , correct French many interesting details about the armies and the court , carefully abstaining from expressing an opinion of his own about the facts he was recounting .
For some time he engrossed the general attention , and Anna P'avlovna felt that the novelty she had served up was received with pleasure by all her visitors .
The greatest attention of all to Bor'is ' narrative was shown by H'el`ene .
She asked him several questions about his journey and seemed greatly interested in the state of the Prussian army .
As soon as he had finished she turned to him with her usual smile .
" You absolutely must come and see me , " she said in a tone that implied that , for certain considerations he could not know of , this was absolutely necessary .
" On Tuesday between eight and nine .
It will give me great pleasure . "
Bor'is promised to fulfill her wish and was about to begin a conversation with her , when Anna P'avlovna called him away on the pretext that her aunt wished to hear him .
" You know her husband , of course ? " said Anna P'avlovna , closing her eyes and indicating H'el`ene with a sorrowful gesture .
"
Ah , she is such an unfortunate and charming woman !
Do n't mention him before her - please do n't !
It is too painful for her ! "
CHAPTER VII
When Bor'is and Anna P'avlovna returned to the others Prince Hippolyte had the ear of the company .
Bending forward in his armchair he said : " Le Roi de Prusse ! " and having said this laughed .
Everyone turned toward him .
" Le Roi de Prusse ? "
Hippolyte said interrogatively , again laughing , and then calmly and seriously sat back in his chair .
Anna P'avlovna waited for him to go on , but as he seemed quite decided to say no more she began to tell of how at Potsdam the impious Bonaparte had stolen the sword of Frederick the Great .
Anna P'avlovna frowned .
Mortemart , Hippolyte 's friend , addressed him firmly .
" Come now , what about your Roi de Prusse ? "
Hippolyte laughed as if ashamed of laughing .
" Oh , it 's nothing .
I only wished to say ... " ( he wanted to repeat a joke he had heard in Vienna and which he had been trying all that evening to get in )
" I only wished to say that we are wrong to fight pour le Roi de Prusse ! "
Bor'is smiled circumspectly , so that it might be taken as ironical or appreciative according to the way the joke was received .
Everybody laughed .
" Your joke is too bad , it 's witty but unjust , " said Anna P'avlovna , shaking her little shriveled finger at him .
" We are not fighting pour le Roi de Prusse , but for right principles .
Oh , that wicked Prince Hippolyte !
" she said .
The conversation did not flag all evening and turned chiefly on the political news .
It became particularly animated toward the end of the evening when the rewards bestowed by the Emperor were mentioned .
" You know N- N- received a snuffbox with the portrait last year ? " said " the man of profound intellect . "
" Why should n't S- S- get the same distinction ? "
" Pardon me !
A snuffbox with the Emperor 's portrait is a reward but not a distinction , " said the diplomatist-"a gift , rather . "
" There are precedents , I may mention Schwarzenberg . "
" It 's impossible , " replied another .
" Will you bet ?
The ribbon of the order is a different matter .... "
When everybody rose to go , H'el`ene who had spoken very little all the evening again turned to Bor'is , asking him in a tone of caressing significant command to come to her on Tuesday .
It seemed as if from some words Bor'is had spoken that evening about the Prussian army , H'el`ene had suddenly found it necessary to see him .
She seemed to promise to explain that necessity to him when he came on Tuesday .
But on Tuesday evening , having come to H'el`ene 's splendid salon , Bor'is received no clear explanation of why it had been necessary for him to come .
You must come ....
Come ! "
During that stay in Petersburg , Bor'is became an intimate in the countess ' house .
CHAPTER VIII
The war was flaming up and nearing the Russian frontier .
Everywhere one heard curses on Bonaparte , " the enemy of mankind . "
Militiamen and recruits were being enrolled in the villages , and from the seat of war came contradictory news , false as usual and therefore variously interpreted .
The life of old Prince Bolk'onski , Prince Andrew , and Princess Mary had greatly changed since 1805 .
In 1806 the old prince was made one of the eight commanders in chief then appointed to supervise the enrollment decreed throughout Russia .
He was continually traveling through the three provinces entrusted to him , was pedantic in the fulfillment of his duties , severe to cruel with his subordinates , and went into everything down to the minutest details himself .
Princess Mary had ceased taking lessons in mathematics from her father , and when the old prince was at home went to his study with the wet nurse and little Prince Nicholas ( as his grandfather called him ) .
But what was still stranger , though of
Soon after Prince Andrew 's return the old prince made over to him a large estate , Boguch'arovo , about twenty - five miles from Bald Hills .
The old prince and his son seemed to have changed roles since the campaign of 1805 .
On February 26 , 1807 , the old prince set off on one of his circuits .
Prince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father 's absence .
Little Nicholas had been unwell for four days .
The coachman who had driven the old prince to town returned bringing papers and letters for Prince Andrew .
Not finding the young prince in his study the valet went with the letters to Princess Mary 's apartments , but did not find him there .
He was told that the prince had gone to the nursery .
" What is it ? "
he said crossly , and , his hand shaking unintentionally , he poured too many drops into the glass .
He threw the mixture onto the floor and asked for some more water .
The maid brought it .
There were in the room a child 's cot , two boxes , two armchairs , a table , a child 's table , and the little chair on which Prince Andrew was sitting .
The curtains were drawn , and a single candle was burning on the table , screened by a bound music book so that the light did not fall on the cot .
" My dear , " said Princess Mary , addressing her brother from beside the cot where she was standing , " better wait a bit ... later ... "
" Oh , leave off , you always talk nonsense and keep putting things off - and this is what comes of it ! " said Prince Andrew in an exasperated whisper , evidently meaning to wound his sister .
" My dear , really ... it 's better not to wake him ... he 's asleep , " said the princess in a tone of entreaty .
Prince Andrew got up and went on tiptoe up to the little bed , wineglass in hand .
" Perhaps we 'd really better not wake him , " he said hesitating .
" As you please ... really ... I think so ... but as you please , " said Princess Mary , evidently intimidated and confused that her opinion had prevailed .
She drew her brother 's attention to the maid who was calling him in a whisper .
It was the second night that neither of them had slept , watching the boy who was in a high fever .
These last days , mistrusting their household doctor and expecting another for whom they had sent to town , they had been trying first one remedy and then another .
Worn out by sleeplessness and anxiety they threw their burden of sorrow on one another and reproached and disputed with each other .
" P'etrusha has come with papers from your father , " whispered the maid .
Prince Andrew went out .
" Devil take them ! " he muttered , and after listening to the verbal instructions his father had sent and taking the correspondence and his father 's letter , he returned to the nursery .
" Well ? " he asked .
" Still the same .
Wait , for heaven 's sake .
Karl Iv'anich always says that sleep is more important than anything , " whispered Princess Mary with a sigh .
Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt him .
He was burning hot .
"
Confound you and your Karl Iv'anich ! "
He took the glass with the drops and again went up to the cot .
" Andrew , do n't ! " said Princess Mary .
But he scowled at her angrily though also with suffering in his eyes , and stooped glass in hand over the infant .
" But I wish it , " he said .
" I beg you - give it him ! "
Princess Mary shrugged her shoulders but took the glass submissively and calling the nurse began giving the medicine .
The child screamed hoarsely .
Prince Andrew winced and , clutching his head , went out and sat down on a sofa in the next room .
He still had all the letters in his hand .
Opening them mechanically he began reading .
The old prince , now and then using abbreviations , wrote in his large elongated hand on blue paper as follows :
Have just this moment received by special messenger very joyful news - if it 's not false .
Bennigsen seems to have obtained a complete victory over Buonaparte at Eylau .
In Petersburg everyone is rejoicing , and the rewards sent to the army are innumerable .
Though he is a German - I congratulate him !
I ca n't make out what the commander at K'orchevo - a certain Khandrik'ov - is up to ; till now the additional men and provisions have not arrived .
Gallop off to him at once and say I 'll have his head off if everything is not here in a week .
Have received another letter about the Preussisch - Eylau battle from P'etenka - he took part in it - and it 's all true .
When mischief - makers do n't meddle even a German beats Buonaparte .
He is said to be fleeing in great disorder .
Mind you gallop off to K'orchevo without delay and carry out instructions !
Prince Andrew sighed and broke the seal of another envelope .
It was a closely written letter of two sheets from Bil'ibin .
He folded it up without reading it and reread his father 's letter , ending with the words : " Gallop off to K'orchevo and carry out instructions ! "
" No , pardon me , I wo n't go now till the child is better , " thought he , going to the door and looking into the nursery .
Princess Mary was still standing by the cot , gently rocking the baby .
" Ah yes , and what else did he say that 's unpleasant ? "
thought Prince Andrew , recalling his father 's letter .
" Yes , we have gained a victory over Bonaparte , just when I 'm not serving .
Yes , yes , he 's always poking fun at me ....
Ah , well !
Let him ! "
And he began reading Bil'ibin 's letter which was written in French .
He read without understanding half of it , read only to forget , if but for a moment , what he had too long been thinking of so painfully to the exclusion of all else .
CHAPTER IX
The letter was old , having been written before the battle at Preussisch - Eylau .
" Since the day of our brilliant success at Austerlitz , " wrote Bil'ibin , " as you know , my dear prince , I never leave headquarters .
I have certainly acquired a taste for war , and it is just as well for me ; what I have seen during these last three months is incredible .
" I begin ab ovo . '
The enemy of the human race , ' as you know , attacks the Prussians .
The Prussians are our faithful allies who have only betrayed us three times in three years .
May I have succeeded ! '
The Prussian generals pride themselves on being polite to the French and lay down their arms at the first demand .
" The head of the garrison at Glogau , with ten thousand men , asks the King of Prussia what he is to do if he is summoned to surrender ....
All this is absolutely true .
We have everything in perfect order , only one little thing is lacking , namely , a commander in chief .
As it was considered that the Austerlitz success might have been more decisive had the commander in chief not been so young , all our octogenarians were reviewed , and of Prozor'ovski and K'amenski
the latter was preferred .
The general comes to us , Suv'orov - like , in a kib'itka , and is received with acclamations of joy and triumph .
" On the 4th , the first courier arrives from Petersburg .
The mails are taken to the field marshal 's room , for he likes to do everything himself .
I am called in to help sort the letters and take those meant for us .
The field marshal looks on and waits for letters addressed to him .
We search , but none are to be found .
The field marshal grows impatient and sets to work himself and finds letters from the Emperor to Count T. , Prince V. , and others .
Then he bursts into one of his wild furies and rages at everyone and everything , seizes the letters , opens them , and reads those from the Emperor addressed to others . '
Ah !
So that 's the way they treat me !
No confidence in me !
Ah , ordered to keep an eye on me !
Very well then !
Get along with you ! '
So he writes the famous order of the day to General Bennigsen :
" ' I am wounded and can not ride and consequently can not command the army .
I myself will remain in hospital at Ostrolenka till I recover .
In regard to which I humbly submit my report , with the information that if the army remains in its present bivouac another fortnight there will not be a healthy man left in it by spring .
" ' Grant leave to retire to his country seat to an old man who is already in any case dishonored by being unable to fulfill the great and glorious task for which he was chosen .
I shall await your most gracious permission here in hospital , that I may not have to play the part of a secretary rather than commander in the army .
My removal from the army does not produce the slightest stir - a blind man has left it .
There are thousands such as I in Russia . '
" The field marshal is angry with the Emperor and he punishes us all , is n't it logical ?
" This is the first act .
Those that follow are naturally increasingly interesting and entertaining .
After the field marshal 's departure it appears that we are within sight of the enemy and must give battle .
He does so .
This is the battle of Pult'usk , which is considered a great victory but in my opinion was nothing of the kind .
We civilians , as you know , have a very bad way of deciding whether a battle was won or lost .
Those who retreat after a battle have lost it is what we say ; and according to that it is we who lost the battle of Pult'usk .
During this interregnum we begin a very original and interesting series of maneuvers .
Our aim is no longer , as it should be , to avoid or attack the enemy , but solely to avoid General Buxh"owden who by right of seniority should be our chief .
So energetically do we pursue this aim that after crossing an unfordable river we burn the bridges to separate ourselves from our enemy , who at the moment is not Bonaparte but Buxh"owden .
General Buxh"owden was all but attacked and captured by a superior enemy force as a result of one of these maneuvers that enabled us to escape him .
Buxh"owden pursues us - we scuttle .
He hardly crosses the river to our side before we recross to the other .
At last our enemy , Buxh"owden , catches us and attacks .
Both generals are angry , and the result is a challenge on Buxh"owden 's part and an epileptic fit on Bennigsen 's .
But as it turns out , just at that moment a third enemy rises before us - namely the Orthodox Russian soldiers , loudly demanding bread , meat , biscuits , fodder , and whatnot !
The stores are empty , the roads impassable .
The Orthodox begin looting , and in a way of which our last campaign can give you no idea .
Half the regiments form bands and scour the countryside and put everything to fire and sword .
The inhabitants are totally ruined , the hospitals overflow with sick , and famine is everywhere .
Twice the marauders even attack our headquarters , and the commander in chief has to ask for a battalion to disperse them .
During one of these attacks they carried off my empty portmanteau and my dressing gown .
The Emperor proposes to give all commanders of divisions the right to shoot marauders , but I much fear this will oblige one half the army to shoot the other . "
When he had read thus far , he crumpled the letter up and threw it away .
It was not what he had read that vexed him , but the fact that the life out there in which he had now no part could perturb him .
He shut his eyes , rubbed his forehead as if to rid himself of all interest in what he had read , and listened to what was passing in the nursery .
Suddenly he thought he heard a strange noise through the door .
He was seized with alarm lest something should have happened to the child while he was reading the letter .
He went on tiptoe to the nursery door and opened it .
Just as he went in he saw that the nurse was hiding something from him with a scared look and that Princess Mary was no longer by the cot .
" My dear , " he heard what seemed to him her despairing whisper behind him .
As often happens after long sleeplessness and long anxiety , he was seized by an unreasoning panic - it occurred to him that the child was dead .
All that he saw and heard seemed to confirm this terror .
" All is over , " he thought , and a cold sweat broke out on his forehead .
He went to the cot in confusion , sure that he would find it empty and that the nurse had been hiding the dead baby .
He drew the curtain aside and for some time his frightened , restless eyes could not find the baby .
At last he saw him : the rosy boy had tossed about till he lay across the bed with his head lower than the pillow , and was smacking his lips in his sleep and breathing evenly .
Prince Andrew was as glad to find the boy like that , as if he had already lost him .
He bent over him and , as his sister had taught him , tried with his lips whether the child was still feverish .
The soft forehead was moist .
Prince Andrew touched the head with his hand ; even the hair was wet , so profusely had the child perspired .
He was not dead , but evidently the crisis was over and he was convalescent .
Prince Andrew longed to snatch up , to squeeze , to hold to his heart , this helpless little creature , but dared not do so .
He stood over him , gazing at his head and at the little arms and legs which showed under the blanket .
He heard a rustle behind him and a shadow appeared under the curtain of the cot .
He did not look round , but still gazing at the infant 's face listened to his regular breathing .
The dark shadow was Princess Mary , who had come up to the cot with noiseless steps , lifted the curtain , and dropped it again behind her .
Prince Andrew recognized her without looking and held out his hand to her .
She pressed it .
" He has perspired , " said Prince Andrew .
" I was coming to tell you so . "
The child moved slightly in his sleep , smiled , and rubbed his forehead against the pillow .
Prince Andrew looked at his sister .
In the dim shadow of the curtain her luminous eyes shone more brightly than usual from the tears of joy that were in them .
She leaned over to her brother and kissed him , slightly catching the curtain of the cot .
Each made the other a warning gesture and stood still in the dim light beneath the curtain as if not wishing to leave that seclusion where they three were shut off from all the world .
Prince Andrew was the first to move away , ruffling his hair against the muslin of the curtain .
" Yes , this is the one thing left me now , " he said with a sigh .
CHAPTER X
When he reached Kiev he sent for all his stewards to the head office and explained to them his intentions and wishes .
The chief steward expressed great sympathy with Pierre 's intentions , but remarked that besides these changes it would be necessary to go into the general state of affairs which was far from satisfactory .
He had a dim perception of the following budget :
Besides this the chief steward wrote every year telling him of fires and bad harvests , or of the necessity of rebuilding factories and workshops .
So the first task Pierre had to face was one for which he had very little aptitude or inclination - practical business .
He discussed estate affairs every day with his chief steward .
But he felt that this did not forward matters at all .
He felt that these consultations were detached from real affairs and did not link up with them or make them move .
" Yes , yes , do so . "
Pierre had none of the practical persistence that would have enabled him to attend to the business himself
and so he disliked it and only tried to pretend to the steward that he was attending to it .
The steward for his part tried to pretend to the count that he considered these consultations very valuable for the proprietor and troublesome to himself .
In Kiev Pierre found some people he knew , and strangers hastened to make his acquaintance and joyfully welcomed the rich newcomer , the largest landowner of the province .
Temptations to Pierre 's greatest weakness - the one to which he had confessed when admitted to the Lodge - were so strong that he could not resist them .
Instead of the new life he had hoped to lead he still lived the old life , only in new surroundings .
He consoled himself with the thought that he fulfilled another of the precepts - that of reforming the human race - and had other virtues - love of his neighbor , and especially generosity .
In the spring of 1807 he decided to return to Petersburg .
The chief steward , who considered the young count 's attempts almost insane - unprofitable to himself , to the count , and to the serfs - made some concessions .
Continuing to represent the liberation of the serfs as impracticable , he arranged for the erection of large buildings - schools , hospitals , and asylums - on all the estates before the master arrived .
The southern spring , the comfortable rapid traveling in a Vienna carriage , and the solitude of the road , all had a gladdening effect on Pierre .
The estates he had not before visited were each more picturesque than the other ; the serfs everywhere seemed thriving and touchingly grateful for the benefits conferred on them .
Everywhere were receptions , which though they embarrassed Pierre awakened a joyful feeling in the depth of his heart .
In another place the women with infants in arms met him to thank him for releasing them from hard work .
On a third estate the priest , bearing a cross , came to meet him surrounded by children whom , by the count 's generosity , he was instructing in reading , writing , and religion .
On all his estates Pierre saw with his own eyes brick buildings erected or in course of erection , all on one plan , for hospitals , schools , and almshouses , which were soon to be opened .
Everywhere he saw the stewards ' accounts , according to which the serfs ' manorial labor had been diminished , and heard the touching thanks of deputations of serfs in their full - skirted blue coats .
He did not know that since the nursing mothers were no longer sent to work on his land , they did still harder work on their own land .
He did not know that the brick buildings , built to plan , were being built by serfs whose manorial labor was thus increased , though lessened on paper .
He did not know that where the steward had shown him in the accounts that the serfs ' payments had been diminished by a third , their obligatory manorial work had been increased by a half .
" How easy it is , how little effort it needs , to do so much good , " thought Pierre , " and how little attention we pay to it ! "
He was pleased at the gratitude he received , but felt abashed at receiving it .
This gratitude reminded him of how much more he might do for these simple , kindly people .
CHAPTER XI
Returning from his journey through South Russia in the happiest state of mind , Pierre carried out an intention he had long had of visiting his friend Bolk'onski , whom he had not seen for two years .
Boguch'arovo lay in a flat uninteresting part of the country among fields and forests of fir and birch , which were partly cut down .
The house lay behind a newly dug pond filled with water to the brink and with banks still bare of grass .
It was at the end of a village that stretched along the highroad in the midst of a young copse in which were a few fir trees .
The homestead consisted of a threshing floor , outhouses , stables , a bathhouse , a lodge , and a large brick house with semicircular facade still in course of construction .
Round the house was a garden newly laid out .
The fences and gates were new and solid ; two fire pumps and a water cart , painted green , stood in a shed ; the paths were straight , the bridges were strong and had handrails .
Everything bore an impress of tidiness and good management .
Some domestic serfs Pierre met , in reply to inquiries as to where the prince lived , pointed out a small newly built lodge close to the pond .
Ant'on , a man who had looked after Prince Andrew in his boyhood , helped Pierre out of his carriage , said that the prince was at home , and showed him into a clean little anteroom .
Pierre was struck by the modesty of the small though clean house after the brilliant surroundings in which he had last met his friend in Petersburg .
He quickly entered the small reception room with its still - unplastered wooden walls redolent of pine , and would have gone farther , but Ant'on ran ahead on tiptoe and knocked at a door .
" Well , what is it ? " came a sharp , unpleasant voice .
" A visitor , " answered Ant'on .
" Ask him to wait , " and the sound was heard of a chair being pushed back .
Pierre went with rapid steps to the door and suddenly came face to face with Prince Andrew , who came out frowning and looking old .
Pierre embraced him and lifting his spectacles kissed his friend on the cheek and looked at him closely .
" Well , I did not expect you , I am very glad , " said Prince Andrew .
Pierre said nothing ; he looked fixedly at his friend with surprise .
He was struck by the change in him .
As is usually the case with people meeting after a prolonged separation , it was long before their conversation could settle on anything .
They put questions and gave brief replies about things they knew ought to be talked over at length .
At last the conversation gradually settled on some of the topics at first lightly touched on : their past life , plans for the future , Pierre 's journeys and occupations , the war , and so on .
It was as if Prince Andrew would have liked to sympathize with what Pierre was saying , but could not .
The latter began to feel that it was in bad taste to speak of his enthusiasms , dreams , and hopes of happiness or goodness , in Prince Andrew 's presence .
He was ashamed to express his new Masonic views , which had been particularly revived and strengthened by his late tour .
" I ca n't tell you how much I have lived through since then .
I hardly know myself again . "
" Yes , we have altered much , very much , since then , " said Prince Andrew .
" Well , and you ?
What are your plans ? "
" Plans ! " repeated Prince Andrew ironically .
" My plans ? " he said , as if astonished at the word . "
Well , you see , I 'm building .
I mean to settle here altogether next year .... "
Pierre looked silently and searchingly into Prince Andrew 's face , which had grown much older .
" No , I meant to ask ... " Pierre began , but Prince Andrew interrupted him .
" But why talk of me ? ...
Talk to me ,
yes , tell me about your travels and all you have been doing on your estates . "
Pierre began describing what he had done on his estates , trying as far as possible to conceal his own part in the improvements that had been made .
Pierre felt uncomfortable and even depressed in his friend 's company and at last became silent .
I am going back to my sister today .
I will introduce you to her .
But of course you know her already , " he said , evidently trying to entertain a visitor with whom he now found nothing in common .
" We will go after dinner .
And would you now like to look round my place ? "
They went out and walked about till dinnertime , talking of the political news and common acquaintances like people who do not know each other intimately .
" However , this is not at all interesting .
Let us have dinner , and then we 'll set off . "
At dinner , conversation turned on Pierre 's marriage .
" I was very much surprised when I heard of it , " said Prince Andrew .
Pierre blushed , as he always did when it was mentioned , and said hurriedly : " I will tell you some time how it all happened .
But you know it is all over , and forever . "
" Forever ? " said Prince Andrew .
" Nothing 's forever . "
" But you know how it all ended , do n't you ?
You heard of the duel ? "
" And so you had to go through that too ! "
" One thing I thank God for is that I did not kill that man , " said Pierre .
" Why so ? " asked Prince Andrew .
" To kill a vicious dog is a very good thing really . "
" No , to kill a man is bad - wrong . "
" Why is it wrong ? " urged Prince Andrew .
" It is not given to man to know what is right and what is wrong .
Men always did and always will err , and in nothing more than in what they consider right and wrong . "
" And who has told you what is bad for another man ? " he asked .
" Bad ! Bad ! " exclaimed Pierre . "
We all know what is bad for ourselves . "
He spoke in French .
" I only know two very real evils in life : remorse and illness .
The only good is the absence of those evils .
To live for myself avoiding those two evils is my whole philosophy now . "
" And love of one 's neighbor , and self - sacrifice ? " began Pierre . "
No , I ca n't agree with you !
To live only so as not to do evil and not to have to repent is not enough .
I lived like that , I lived for myself and ruined my life .
And only now when I am living , or at least trying " ( Pierre 's modesty made him correct himself ) " to live for others , only now have I understood all the happiness of life .
No , I shall not agree with you , and you do not really believe what you are saying . "
Prince Andrew looked silently at Pierre with an ironic smile .
" When you see my sister , Princess Mary , you 'll get on with her , " he said .
" Perhaps you are right for yourself , " he added after a short pause , " but everyone lives in his own way .
You lived for yourself and say you nearly ruined your life and only found happiness when you began living for others .
I experienced just the reverse .
I lived for glory .-
And after all what is glory ?
The same love of others , a desire to do something for them , a desire for their approval .- So I lived for others , and not almost , but quite , ruined my life .
And I have become calmer since I began to live only for myself . "
" But what do you mean by living only for yourself ? " asked Pierre , growing excited . "
What about your son , your sister , and your father ? "
" But that 's just the same as myself - they are not others , " explained Prince Andrew .
" The others , one 's neighbors , le prochain , as you and Princess Mary call it , are the chief source of all error and evil .
Le prochain - your Kiev peasants to whom you want to do good . "
And he looked at Pierre with a mocking , challenging expression .
He evidently wished to draw him on .
" You are joking , " replied Pierre , growing more and more excited .
" What error or evil can there be in my wishing to do good , and even doing a little - though I did very little and did it very badly ?
And the main thing is , " he continued , " that I know , and know for certain , that the enjoyment of doing this good is the only sure happiness in life . "
" Yes , if you put it like that it 's quite a different matter , " said Prince Andrew .
" I build a house and lay out a garden , and you build hospitals .
The one and the other may serve as a pastime .
But what 's right
and what 's good must be judged by one who knows all , but not by us .
Well , you want an argument , " he added , " come on then . "
They rose from the table and sat down in the entrance porch which served as a veranda .
" Come , let 's argue then , " said Prince Andrew , " You talk of schools , " he went on , crooking a finger , " education and so forth ;
I envy him , but you want to make him what I am , without giving him my means .
Then you say , ' lighten his toil . '
But as I see it , physical labor is as essential to him , as much a condition of his existence , as mental activity is to you or me .
You ca n't help thinking .
I go to bed after two in the morning
Just as I could not stand his terrible physical labor but should die of it in a week , so he could not stand my physical idleness , but would grow fat and die .
The third thing -
what else was it you talked about ? " and Prince Andrew crooked a third finger . "
Ah , yes , hospitals , medicine .
He has a fit , he is dying , and you come and bleed him and patch him up .
He will drag about as a cripple , a burden to everybody , for another ten years .
It would be far easier and simpler for him to die .
Others are being born and there are plenty of them as it is .
It would be different if you grudged losing a laborer - that 's how I regard him - but you want to cure him from love of him .
And he does not want that .
And besides , what a notion that medicine ever cured anyone !
Killed them , yes ! " said he , frowning angrily and turning away from Pierre .
His glance became more animated as his conclusions became more hopeless .
" Oh , that is dreadful , dreadful ! " said Pierre .
" I do n't understand how one can live with such ideas .
I had such moments myself not long ago , in Moscow and when traveling , but at such times I collapsed so that I do n't live at all
- everything seems hateful to me ...
myself most of all .
Then I do n't eat , do n't wash ... and how is it with you ? ... "
" Why not wash ?
That is not cleanly , " said Prince Andrew ; " on the contrary one must try to make one 's life as pleasant as possible .
I 'm alive , that is not my fault , so I must live out my life as best
I can without hurting others . "
" But with such ideas what motive have you for living ?
One would sit without moving , undertaking nothing .... "
" Life as it is leaves one no peace .
They could not understand that I have not the necessary qualifications for it - the kind of good - natured , fussy shallowness necessary for the position .
Then there 's this house , which must be built in order to have a nook of one 's own in which to be quiet .
And now there 's this recruiting . "
" Why are n't you serving in the army ? "
" After Austerlitz ! " said Prince Andrew gloomily .
" No , thank you very much !
I have promised myself not to serve again in the active Russian army .
And I won't - not even if Bonaparte were here at Smol'ensk threatening Bald Hills - even then I would n't serve in the Russian army !
Well , as I was saying , " he continued , recovering his composure , " now there 's this recruiting .
My father is chief in command of the Third District , and my only way of avoiding active service is to serve under him . "
" Then you are serving ? "
" I am . "
He paused a little while .
" And why do you serve ? "
" Why , for this reason !
My father is one of the most remarkable men of his time .
But he is growing old , and though not exactly cruel he has too energetic a character .
He is so accustomed to unlimited power that he is terrible , and now he has this authority of a commander in chief of the recruiting , granted by the Emperor .
If I had been two hours late a fortnight ago he would have had a paymaster 's clerk at Y'ukhnovna hanged , " said Prince Andrew with a smile .
"
So I am serving because I alone have any influence with my father , and now and then can save him from actions which would torment him afterwards . "
" Well , there you see ! "
" Yes , but it is not as you imagine , " Prince Andrew continued .
Prince Andrew grew more and more animated .
His eyes glittered feverishly while he tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions there was no desire to do good to his neighbor .
If they are beaten , flogged , or sent to Siberia , I do n't suppose they are any the worse off .
In Siberia they lead the same animal life , and the stripes on their bodies heal , and they are happy as before .
But it is a good thing for proprietors who perish morally , bring remorse upon themselves , stifle this remorse and grow callous , as a result of being able to inflict punishments justly and unjustly .
It is those people I pity , and for their sake I should like to liberate the serfs .
Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinking that these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his father 's case .
He did not reply .
" No , no !
A thousand times no !
I shall never agree with you , " said Pierre .
CHAPTER XII
In the evening Andrew and Pierre got into the open carriage and drove to Bald Hills .
Prince Andrew , glancing at Pierre , broke the silence now and then with remarks which showed that he was in a good temper .
Pointing to the fields , he spoke of the improvements he was making in his husbandry .
Pierre remained gloomily silent , answering in monosyllables and apparently immersed in his own thoughts .
He was thinking that Prince Andrew was unhappy , had gone astray , did not see the true light , and that he , Pierre , ought to aid , enlighten , and raise him .
" No , but why do you think so ? "
Pierre suddenly began , lowering his head and looking like a bull about to charge , " why do you think so ?
You should not think so . "
" Think ?
What about ?
" asked Prince Andrew with surprise .
" About life , about man 's destiny .
It ca n't be so .
I myself thought like that , and do you know what saved me ?
Freemasonry !
No , do n't smile .
Freemasonry is not a religious ceremonial sect , as I thought it was : Freemasonry is the best expression of the best , the eternal , aspects of humanity . "
And he began to explain Freemasonry as he understood it to Prince Andrew .
He said that Freemasonry is the teaching of Christianity freed from the bonds of State and Church , a teaching of equality , brotherhood , and love .
" Only our holy brotherhood has the real meaning of life , all the rest is a dream , " said Pierre .
Prince Andrew , looking straight in front of him , listened in silence to Pierre 's words .
They reached a river that had overflowed its banks and which they had to cross by ferry .
While the carriage and horses were being placed on it , they also stepped on the raft .
Prince Andrew , leaning his arms on the raft railing , gazed silently at the flooding waters glittering in the setting sun .
" Well , what do you think about it ? "
Pierre asked .
" Why are you silent ? "
" What do I think about it ?
I am listening to you .
It 's all very well ....
You say : join our brotherhood and we will show you the aim of life , the destiny of man , and the laws which govern the world .
But who are we ?
Men .
How is it you know everything ?
Why do I alone not see what you see ?
You see a reign of goodness and truth on earth , but I do n't see it . "
Pierre interrupted him .
" Do you believe in a future life ? " he asked .
" A future life ? "
Prince Andrew repeated , but Pierre , giving him no time to reply , took the repetition for a denial , the more readily as he knew Prince Andrew 's former atheistic convictions .
" You say you ca n't see a reign of goodness and truth on earth .
Nor could I , and it can not be seen if one looks on our life here as the end of everything .
Do n't I feel in my soul that I am part of this vast harmonious whole ?
If I see , clearly see ,
that ladder leading from plant to man , why should I suppose it breaks off at me and does not go farther and farther ?
I feel that I can not vanish , since nothing vanishes in this world , but that I shall always exist and always have existed .
I feel that beyond me and above me there are spirits , and that in this world there is truth . "
" Yes , that is Herder 's theory , " said Prince Andrew , " but it is not that which can convince me , dear friend - life and death are what convince .
What convinces is when one sees a being dear to one , bound up with one 's own life , before whom one was to blame and had hoped to make it right "
( Prince Andrew 's voice trembled and he turned away ) , " and suddenly that being is seized with pain , suffers , and ceases to exist ....
Why ?
It can not be that there is no answer .
And I believe there is ....
That 's what convinces , that is what has convinced me , " said Prince Andrew .
" Yes , yes , of course , " said Pierre , " is n't that what I 'm saying ? "
" No .
And I have looked in .... "
" Well , that 's it then !
You know that there is a there
and there is a Someone ?
There is the future life .
The Someone is - God . "
Prince Andrew did not reply .
The carriage and horses had long since been taken off , onto the farther bank , and reharnessed .
" If there is a God and future life , there is truth and good , and man 's highest happiness consists in striving to attain them .
Prince Andrew stood leaning on the railing of the raft listening to Pierre , and he gazed with his eyes fixed on the red reflection of the sun gleaming on the blue waters .
There was perfect stillness .
Pierre became silent .
The raft had long since stopped and only the waves of the current beat softly against it below .
Prince Andrew felt as if the sound of the waves kept up a refrain to Pierre 's words , whispering :
" It is true , believe it . "
He sighed , and glanced with a radiant , childlike , tender look at Pierre 's face , flushed and rapturous , but yet shy before his superior friend .
" Yes , if it only were so ! " said Prince Andrew . "
It vanished as soon as he returned to the customary conditions of his life , but he knew that this feeling which he did not know how to develop existed within him .
His meeting with Pierre formed an epoch in Prince Andrew 's life .
Though outwardly he continued to live in the same old way , inwardly he began a new life .
CHAPTER XIII
It was getting dusk when Prince Andrew and Pierre drove up to the front entrance of the house at Bald Hills .
As they approached the house , Prince Andrew with a smile drew Pierre 's attention to a commotion going on at the back porch .
Two women ran out after them , and all four , looking round at the carriage , ran in dismay up the steps of the back porch .
" Those are Mary 's ' God 's folk , ' " said Prince Andrew .
" They have mistaken us for my father .
This is the one matter in which she disobeys him .
He orders these pilgrims to be driven away , but she receives them . "
" But what are ' God 's folk ' ? " asked Pierre .
Prince Andrew had no time to answer .
The servants came out to meet them , and he asked where the old prince was and whether he was expected back soon .
The old prince had gone to the town and was expected back any minute .
Prince Andrew led Pierre to his own apartments , which were always kept in perfect order and readiness for him in his father 's house ; he himself went to the nursery .
" Let us go and see my sister , " he said to Pierre when he returned .
" I have not found her yet , she is hiding now , sitting with her ' God 's folk . '
It will serve her right , she will be confused , but you will see her ' God 's folk . '
It 's really very curious . "
" What are ' God 's folk ' ? " asked Pierre .
" Come , and you 'll see for yourself . "
Princess Mary really was disconcerted and red patches came on her face when they went in .
Near them , in an armchair , sat a thin , shriveled , old woman , with a meek expression on her childlike face .
" Andrew , why did n't you warn me ? " said the princess , with mild reproach , as she stood before her pilgrims like a hen before her chickens .
" Charm'ee de vous voir .
Je suis tr`es contente de vous voir , "
* she said to Pierre as he kissed her hand .
She had known him as a child , and now his friendship with Andrew , his misfortune with his wife , and above all his kindly , simple face disposed her favorably toward him .
She looked at him with her beautiful radiant eyes and seemed to say , " I like you very much , but please do n't laugh at my people . "
After exchanging the first greetings , they sat down .
* " Delighted to see you .
I am very glad to see you . "
" Ah , and Iv'anushka is here too ! " said Prince Andrew , glancing with a smile at the young pilgrim .
" Andrew ! " said Princess Mary , imploringly . "
Il faut que vous sachiez que c'est une femme , " * said Prince Andrew to Pierre .
" Andrew , au nom de Dieu ! "
* ( 2 ) Princess Mary repeated .
* " You must know that this is a woman . "
* ( 2 ) " For heaven 's sake . "
It was evident that Prince Andrew 's ironical tone toward the pilgrims and Princess Mary 's helpless attempts to protect them were their customary long - established relations on the matter .
" Mais , ma bonne amie , " said Prince Andrew , " vous devriez au contraire
m'^etre reconnaissante de ce que j'explique ` a Pierre votre intimit'e
avec ce jeune homme . " *
* " But , my dear , you ought on the contrary to be grateful to me for explaining to Pierre your intimacy with this young man . "
Princess Mary 's embarrassment on her people 's account was quite unnecessary .
They were not in the least abashed .
Iv'anushka , sipping out of her saucer , looked with sly womanish eyes from under her brows at the young men .
" Where have you been ?
To Kiev ?
"
Prince Andrew asked the old woman .
" I have , good sir , " she answered garrulously .
" Just at Christmastime I was deemed worthy to partake of the holy and heavenly sacrament at the shrine of the saint .
And now I 'm from Koly'azin , master , where a great and wonderful blessing has been revealed . "
" And was Iv'anushka with you ? "
" I go by myself , benefactor , " said Iv'anushka , trying to speak in a bass voice .
" I only came across Pelag'eya in Y'ukhnovo .... "
Pelag'eya interrupted her companion ; she evidently wished to tell what she had seen .
" In Koly'azin , master , a wonderful blessing has been revealed . "
" What is it ?
Some new relics ? " asked Prince Andrew .
" Andrew , do leave off , " said Princess Mary .
" Do n't tell him , Pelag'eya . "
" No ... why not , my dear , why should n't I ?
I like him .
He is kind , he is one of God 's chosen , he 's a benefactor , he once gave me ten rubles , I remember .
Go to Koly'azin where a wonder - working icon of the Holy Mother of God has been revealed . '
On hearing those words I said good - by to the holy folk and went . "
All were silent , only the pilgrim woman went on in measured tones , drawing in her breath .
" All right , all right , you can tell us afterwards , " said Princess Mary , flushing .
" Let me ask her , " said Pierre .
" Did you see it yourselves ? "
he inquired .
" Oh , yes , master , I was found worthy .
Such a brightness on the face like the light of heaven , and from the blessed Mother 's cheek it drops and drops .... "
" But , dear me , that must be a fraud ! " said Pierre , na"ively , who had listened attentively to the pilgrim .
" Oh , master , what are you saying ? " exclaimed the horrified Pelag'eya , turning to Princess Mary for support .
" They impose on the people , " he repeated .
" Lord Jesus Christ ! " exclaimed the pilgrim woman , crossing herself . "
Oh , do n't speak so , master !
There was a general who did not believe , and said , ' The monks cheat , ' and as soon as he 'd said it he went blind .
And he dreamed that the Holy Virgin Mother of the Kiev catacombs came to him and said , ' Believe in me and I will make you whole . '
So he begged : ' Take me to her , take me to her . '
It 's the real truth I 'm telling you , I saw it myself .
I saw it myself , master , the star is fixed into the icon .
Well , and what do you think ?
He received his sight !
It 's a sin to speak so .
God will punish you , " she said admonishingly , turning to Pierre .
" How did the star get into the icon ? "
Pierre asked .
" And was the Holy Mother promoted to the rank of general ? " said Prince Andrew , with a smile .
Pelag'eya suddenly grew quite pale and clasped her hands .
" Oh , master , master , what a sin !
And you who have a son !
" she began , her pallor suddenly turning to a vivid red . "
Master , what have you said ?
God forgive you ! "
And she crossed herself . "
Lord forgive him !
My dear , what does it mean ? ...
" she asked , turning to Princess Mary .
She got up and , almost crying , began to arrange her wallet .
She evidently felt frightened and ashamed to have accepted charity in a house where such things could be said , and was at the same time sorry to have now to forgo the charity of this house .
" Now , why need you do it ? " said Princess Mary .
" Why did you come to me ? ... "
" Come , Pelag'eya , I was joking , " said Pierre .
" Princesse , ma parole , je n'ai pas voulu l'offenser .
* I did not mean anything , I was only joking , " he said , smiling shyly and trying to efface his offense .
" It was all my fault , and Andrew was only joking . "
* " Princess , on my word , I did not wish to offend her . "
Pelag'eya stopped doubtfully , but in Pierre 's face there was such a look of sincere penitence , and Prince Andrew glanced so meekly now at her and now at Pierre , that she was gradually reassured .
CHAPTER XIV
let her have the keys of the catacombs , and how she , taking some dried bread with her , had spent two days in the catacombs with the saints .
" I 'd pray awhile to one , ponder awhile , then go on to another .
Pierre listened to her attentively and seriously .
Prince Andrew went out of the room , and then , leaving " God 's folk " to finish their tea , Princess Mary took Pierre into the drawing room .
" You are very kind , " she said to him .
" Oh , I really did not mean to hurt her feelings .
I understand them so well and have the greatest respect for them . "
Princess Mary looked at him silently and smiled affectionately .
" I have known you a long time , you see , and am as fond of you as of a brother , " she said .
" How do you find Andrew ? "
she added hurriedly , not giving him time to reply to her affectionate words .
" I am very anxious about him .
His health was better in the winter , but last spring his wound reopened and the doctor said he ought to go away for a cure .
And I am also very much afraid for him spiritually .
He has not a character like us women who , when we suffer , can weep away our sorrows .
He keeps it all within him .
Today he is cheerful and in good spirits , but that is the effect of your visit - he is not often like that .
If you could persuade him to go abroad .
He needs activity , and this quiet regular life is very bad for him .
Others do n't notice it , but I see it . "
Toward ten o'clock the men servants rushed to the front door , hearing the bells of the old prince 's carriage approaching .
Prince Andrew and Pierre also went out into the porch .
" Who 's that ? " asked the old prince , noticing Pierre as he got out of the carriage .
" Ah ! Very glad !
Kiss me , " he said , having learned who the young stranger was .
The old prince was in a good temper and very gracious to Pierre .
Before supper , Prince Andrew , coming back to his father 's study , found him disputing hotly with his visitor .
Pierre was maintaining that a time would come when there would be no more wars .
The old prince disputed it chaffingly , but without getting angry .
" Drain the blood from men 's veins and put in water instead , then there will be no more war !
Old women 's nonsense - old women 's nonsense ! "
The old prince went up to him and began to talk business .
" The marshal , a Count Rost'ov , has n't sent half his contingent .
He came to town and wanted to invite me to dinner
- I gave him a pretty dinner ! ...
And there , look at this ....
Well , my boy , " the old prince went on , addressing his son and patting Pierre on the shoulder . "
A fine fellow - your friend - I like him !
He stirs me up .
Another says clever things and one does n't care to listen , but this one talks rubbish yet stirs an old fellow up .
Well , go !
Get along !
Perhaps I 'll come and sit with you at supper .
We 'll have another dispute .
Make friends with my little fool , Princess Mary , " he shouted after Pierre , through the door .
Only now , on his visit to Bald Hills , did Pierre fully realize the strength and charm of his friendship with Prince Andrew .
That charm was not expressed so much in his relations with him as with all his family and with the household .
With the stern old prince and the gentle , timid Princess Mary , though he had scarcely known them , Pierre at once felt like an old friend .
They were all fond of him already .
The old prince came in to supper ; this was evidently on Pierre 's account .
And during the two days of the young man 's visit he was extremely kind to him and told him to visit them again .
CHAPTER XV
When returning from his leave , Rost'ov felt , for the first time , how close was the bond that united him to Den'isov and the whole regiment .
On approaching it , Rost'ov felt as he had done when approaching his home in Moscow .
The regiment was also a home , and as unalterably dear and precious as his parents ' house .
Here , in the regiment , all was clear and simple .
The whole world was divided into two unequal parts : one , our P'avlograd regiment ; the other , all the rest .
And the rest was no concern of his .
In the regiment , everything was definite : who was lieutenant , who captain , who was a good fellow , who a bad one , and most of all , who was a comrade .
Having once more entered into the definite conditions of this regimental life , Rost'ov felt the joy and relief a tired man feels on lying down to rest .
After his losses , he had determined to pay back his debt to his parents in five years .
He received ten thousand rubles a year , but now resolved to take only two thousand and leave the rest to repay the debt to his parents .
Our army , after repeated retreats and advances and battles at Pult'usk and Preussisch - Eylau , was concentrated near Bartenstein .
It was awaiting the Emperor 's arrival and the beginning of a new campaign .
It had been neither at Pult'usk nor at Preussisch - Eylau and , when it joined the army in the field in the second half of the campaign , was attached to Pl'atov 's division .
Pl'atov 's division was acting independently of the main army .
Several times parts of the P'avlograd regiment had exchanged shots with the enemy , had taken prisoners , and once had even captured Marshal Oudinot 's carriages .
In April the P'avlograds were stationed immovably for some weeks near a totally ruined and deserted German village .
A thaw had set in , it was muddy and cold , the ice on the river broke , and the roads became impassable .
For days neither provisions for the men nor fodder for the horses had been issued .
As no transports could arrive , the men dispersed about the abandoned and deserted villages , searching for potatoes , but found few even of these .
The P'avlograd regiment had had only two men wounded in action , but had lost nearly half its men from hunger and sickness .
When spring came on , the soldiers found a plant just showing out of the ground that looked like asparagus , which , for some reason , they called " M'ashka 's sweet root .
That spring a new disease broke out among the soldiers , a swelling of the arms , legs , and face , which the doctors attributed to eating this root .
The horses also had been fed for a fortnight on straw from the thatched roofs and had become terribly thin , though still covered with tufts of felty winter hair .
Despite this destitution , the soldiers and officers went on living just as usual .
The officers , as usual , lived in twos and threes in the roofless , half - ruined houses .
The seniors tried to collect straw and potatoes and , in general , food for the men .
The younger ones occupied themselves as before , some playing cards ( there was plenty of money , though there was no food ) , some with more innocent games , such as quoits and skittles .
The general trend of the campaign was rarely spoken of , partly because nothing certain was known about it , partly because there was a vague feeling that in the main it was going badly .
Rost'ov lived , as before , with Den'isov , and since their furlough they had become more friendly than ever .
Den'isov never spoke of Rost'ov 's family , but by the tender friendship his commander showed him , Rost'ov felt that the elder hussar 's luckless love for Nat'asha played a part in strengthening their friendship .
Den'isov evidently tried to expose Rost'ov to danger as seldom as possible , and after an action greeted his safe return with evident joy .
They were half clad , hungry , too weak to get away on foot and had no means of obtaining a conveyance .
Rost'ov brought them to his quarters , placed them in his own lodging , and kept them for some weeks while the old man was recovering .
Rost'ov took the joke as an insult , flared up , and said such unpleasant things to the officer that it was all Den'isov could do to prevent a duel .
When the officer had gone away , Den'isov , who did not himself know what Rost'ov 's relations with the Polish girl might be , began to upbraid him for his quickness of temper , and Rost'ov replied :
" Say what you like ....
She is like a sister to me , and I ca n't tell you how it offended me ...
because ... well , for that reason .... "
Den'isov patted him on the shoulder and began rapidly pacing the room without looking at Rost'ov , as was his way at moments of deep feeling .
" Ah , what a mad bweed you Wost'ovs are ! "
he muttered , and Rost'ov noticed tears in his eyes .
CHAPTER XVI
They were bivouacking .
Den'isov and Rost'ov were living in an earth hut , dug out for them by the soldiers and roofed with branches and turf .
The hut was made in the following manner , which had then come into vogue .
A trench was dug three and a half feet wide , four feet eight inches deep , and eight feet long .
At one end of the trench , steps were cut out and these formed the entrance and vestibule .
The trench itself was the room , in which the lucky ones , such as the squadron commander , had a board , lying on piles at the end opposite the entrance , to serve as a table .
On each side of the trench , the earth was cut out to a breadth of about two and a half feet , and this did duty for bedsteads and couches .
The roof was so constructed that one could stand up in the middle of the trench and could even sit up on the beds if one drew close to the table .
In April , Rost'ov was on orderly duty .
He was pleasantly considering the probability of being promoted in a few days for his last reconnoitering expedition , and was awaiting Den'isov , who had gone out somewhere and with whom he wanted a talk .
Suddenly he heard Den'isov shouting in a vibrating voice behind the hut , evidently much excited .
Rost'ov moved to the window to see whom he was speaking to , and saw the quartermaster , Topch'eenko .
" I ordered you not to let them eat that M'ashka woot stuff ! " Den'isov was shouting . "
And I saw with my own eyes how Lazarch'uk bwought
some fwom the fields . "
" I have given the order again and again , your honor , but they do n't obey , " answered the quartermaster .
Rost'ov lay down again on his bed and thought complacently : " Let him fuss and bustle now , my job 's done
and I 'm lying down - capitally ! "
He could hear that Lavr'ushka - that sly , bold orderly of Den'isov's - was talking , as well as the quartermaster .
Lavr'ushka was saying something about loaded wagons , biscuits , and oxen he had seen when he had gone out for provisions .
Then Den'isov 's voice was heard shouting farther and farther away . "
Saddle !
Second platoon ! "
" Where are they off to now ? " thought Rost'ov .
In answer to Rost'ov 's inquiry where he was going , he answered vaguely and crossly that he had some business .
" Let God and our gweat monarch judge me afterwards ! " said Den'isov going out , and Rost'ov heard the hoofs of several horses splashing through the mud .
He did not even trouble to find out where Den'isov had gone .
Having got warm in his corner , he fell asleep and did not leave the hut till toward evening .
Den'isov had not yet returned .
The weather had cleared up , and near the next hut two officers and a cadet were playing sv'ayka , laughing as they threw their missiles which buried themselves in the soft mud .
Rost'ov joined them .
In the middle of the game , the officers saw some wagons approaching with fifteen hussars on their skinny horses behind them .
The wagons escorted by the hussars drew up to the picket ropes and a crowd of hussars surrounded them .
" There now , Den'isov has been worrying , " said Rost'ov , " and here are the provisions . "
" So they are ! " said the officers .
" Wo n't the soldiers be glad ! "
A little behind the hussars came Den'isov , accompanied by two infantry officers with whom he was talking .
Rost'ov went to meet them .
" I warn you , Captain , " one of the officers , a short thin man , evidently very angry , was saying .
" Have n't I told you I wo n't give them up ? "
replied Den'isov .
" You will answer for it , Captain .
It is mutiny - seizing the transport of one 's own army .
Our men have had nothing to eat for two days . "
" And mine have had nothing for two weeks , " said Den'isov .
" It is robbery !
You 'll answer for it , sir ! " said the infantry officer , raising his voice .
" Now , what are you pestewing me for ? " cried Den'isov , suddenly losing his temper .
" I shall answer for it and not you , and you 'd better not buzz about here till you get hurt .
Be off !
Go !
" he shouted at the officers .
" Very well , then ! " shouted the little officer , undaunted and not riding away .
" If you are determined to rob , I 'll ... "
" Go to the devil !
quick ma'ch , while you 're safe and sound ! "
and Den'isov turned his horse on the officer .
" Very well , very well ! " muttered the officer , threateningly , and turning his horse he trotted away , jolting in his saddle .
" A dog astwide a fence !
A weal dog astwide a fence ! "
shouted Den'isov after him ( the most insulting expression a cavalryman can address to a mounted infantryman ) and riding up to Rost'ov , he burst out laughing .
" I 've taken twansports from the infantwy by force ! " he said .
" After all , ca n't let our men starve . "
The wagons that had reached the hussars had been consigned to an infantry regiment , but learning from Lavr'ushka that the transport was unescorted , Den'isov with his hussars had seized it by force .
The soldiers had biscuits dealt out to them freely , and they even shared them with the other squadrons .
The next day the regimental commander sent for Den'isov , and holding his fingers spread out before his eyes said :
If not , as the demand was booked against an infantry regiment , there will be a row and the affair may end badly . "
From the regimental commander 's , Den'isov rode straight to the staff with a sincere desire to act on this advice .
In the evening he came back to his dugout in a state such as Rost'ov had never yet seen him in .
Den'isov could not speak and gasped for breath .
When Rost'ov asked what was the matter , he only uttered some incoherent oaths and threats in a hoarse , feeble voice .
Alarmed at Den'isov 's condition , Rost'ov suggested that he should undress , drink some water , and send for the doctor .
" Twy me for wobbewy ...
oh !
Some more water ...
Let them twy me , but I 'll always thwash scoundwels ... and I 'll tell the Empewo ' ...
Ice ... " he muttered .
The regimental doctor , when he came , said it was absolutely necessary to bleed Den'isov .
A deep saucer of black blood was taken from his hairy arm and only then was he able to relate what had happened to him .
" I get there , " began Den'isov . "
' Now then , where 's your chief 's quarters ? '
They were pointed out . '
Please to wait . ' '
I 've widden twenty miles and have duties to attend to and no time to wait .
Announce me . '
Will you please be silent ? ' '
Vewy good ! '
Then he says : ' Go and give a weceipt to the commissioner , but your affair will be passed on to headquarters . '
I go to the commissioner .
I enter , and at the table ... who do you think ?
No , but wait a bit ! ...
Who is it that 's starving us ? "
shouted Den'isov , hitting the table with the fist of his newly bled arm so violently that the table nearly broke down and the tumblers on it jumped about . "
Tely'anin ! '
What ?
So it 's you who 's starving us to death !
Is it ?
Take this and this ! '
and I hit him
so pat , stwaight on his snout ... '
Ah , what a ... what a ... ! '
and I sta'ted fwashing him ...
Well , I 've had a bit of fun I can tell you ! "
cried Den'isov , gleeful and yet angry , his white teeth showing under his black mustache .
" I 'd have killed him if they had n't taken him away ! "
" But what are you shouting for ?
Calm yourself , " said Rost'ov .
" You 've set your arm bleeding afresh .
Wait , we must tie it up again . "
Den'isov was bandaged up again and put to bed .
Next day he woke calm and cheerful .
On the previous day Pl'atov reconnoitered with two Cossack regiments and two squadrons of hussars .
Den'isov , as was his wo nt , rode out in front of the outposts , parading his courage .
A bullet fired by a French sharpshooter hit him in the fleshy part of his leg .
Perhaps at another time Den'isov would not have left the regiment for so slight a wound , but now he took advantage of it to excuse himself from appearing at the staff and went into hospital .
CHAPTER XVII
In June the battle of Friedland was fought , in which the P'avlograds did not take part , and after that an armistice was proclaimed .
The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twice devastated by Russian and French troops .
The hospital was in a brick building with some of the window frames and panes broken and a courtyard surrounded by the remains of a wooden fence that had been pulled to pieces .
Several bandaged soldiers , with pale swollen faces , were sitting or walking about in the sunshine in the yard .
Directly Rost'ov entered the door he was enveloped by a smell of putrefaction and hospital air .
On the stairs he met a Russian army doctor smoking a cigar .
The doctor was followed by a Russian assistant .
" I ca n't tear myself to pieces , " the doctor was saying .
" Come to Mak'ar Alex'eevich in the evening .
I shall be there . "
The assistant asked some further questions .
" Oh , do the best you can !
Is n't it all the same ? "
The doctor noticed Rost'ov coming upstairs .
" What do you want , sir ? " said the doctor .
" What do you want ?
The bullets having spared you , do you want to try typhus ?
This is a pesthouse , sir . "
" How so ? " asked Rost'ov .
" Typhus , sir .
It 's death to go in .
Only we two , Mak'eev and I "
( he pointed to the assistant ) , " keep on here .
Some five of us doctors have died in this place ....
When a new one comes he is done for in a week , " said the doctor with evident satisfaction .
" Prussian doctors have been invited here , but our allies do n't like it at all . "
Rost'ov explained that he wanted to see Major Den'isov of the hussars , who was wounded .
" I do n't know .
I ca n't tell you , sir .
Only think !
I am alone in charge of three hospitals with more than four hundred patients !
It 's well that the charitable Prussian ladies send us two pounds of coffee and some lint each month
or we should be lost !
" he laughed .
" Four hundred , sir , and they 're always sending me fresh ones .
There are four hundred ?
Eh ? " he asked , turning to the assistant .
The assistant looked fagged out .
He was evidently vexed and impatient for the talkative doctor to go .
" Major Den'isov , " Rost'ov said again . "
He was wounded at Molliten . "
" Dead , I fancy .
Eh , Mak'eev ? "
queried the doctor , in a tone of indifference .
The assistant , however , did not confirm the doctor 's words .
" Is he tall and with reddish hair ? " asked the doctor .
Rost'ov described Den'isov 's appearance .
" There was one like that , " said the doctor , as if pleased .
" That one is dead , I fancy .
However , I 'll look up our list .
We had a list .
Have you got it , Mak'eev ? "
" Mak'ar Alex'eevich has the list , " answered the assistant .
"
But if you 'll step into the officers ' wards you 'll see for yourself , " he added , turning to Rost'ov .
" Ah , you 'd better not go , sir , " said the doctor , " or you may have to stay here yourself . "
But Rost'ov bowed himself away from the doctor and asked the assistant to show him the way .
" Only do n't blame me ! "
the doctor shouted up after him .
Rost'ov and the assistant went into the dark corridor .
The smell was so strong there that Rost'ov held his nose and had to pause and collect his strength before he could go on .
A door opened to the right , and an emaciated sallow man on crutches , barefoot and in underclothing , limped out and , leaning against the doorpost , looked with glittering envious eyes at those who were passing .
Glancing in at the door , Rost'ov saw that the sick and wounded were lying on the floor on straw and overcoats .
" May I go in and look ? "
" What is there to see ? " said the assistant .
But , just because the assistant evidently did not want him to go in , Rost'ov entered the soldiers ' ward .
The foul air , to which he had already begun to get used in the corridor , was still stronger here .
It was a little different , more pungent , and one felt that this was where it originated .
In the long room , brightly lit up by the sun through the large windows , the sick and wounded lay in two rows with their heads to the walls , and leaving a passage in the middle .
Most of them were unconscious and paid no attention to the newcomers .
Those who were conscious raised themselves or lifted their thin yellow faces , and all looked intently at Rost'ov with the same expression of hope , of relief , reproach , and envy of another 's health .
Rost'ov went to the middle of the room and looking through the open doors into the two adjoining rooms saw the same thing there .
He stood still , looking silently around .
He had not at all expected such a sight .
Just before him , almost across the middle of the passage on the bare floor , lay a sick man , probably a Cossack to judge by the cut of his hair .
The man lay on his back , his huge arms and legs outstretched .
His face was purple , his eyes were rolled back so that only the whites were seen , and on his bare legs and arms which were still red , the veins stood out like cords .
He was knocking the back of his head against the floor , hoarsely uttering some word which he kept repeating .
Rost'ov listened and made out the word .
It was " drink , drink , a drink ! "
Rost'ov glanced round , looking for someone who would put this man back in his place and bring him water .
" Who looks after the sick here ? " he asked the assistant .
Just then a commissariat soldier , a hospital orderly , came in from the next room , marching stiffly , and drew up in front of Rost'ov .
" Good day , your honor ! " he shouted , rolling his eyes at Rost'ov and evidently mistaking him for one of the hospital authorities .
" Get him to his place and give him some water , " said Rost'ov , pointing to the Cossack .
" Yes , your honor , " the soldier replied complacently , and rolling his eyes more than ever he drew himself up still straighter , but did not move .
Close to the corner , on an overcoat , sat an old , unshaven , gray - bearded soldier as thin as a skeleton , with a stern sallow face and eyes intently fixed on Rost'ov .
The man 's neighbor on one side whispered something to him , pointing at Rost'ov , who noticed that the old man wanted to speak to him .
He drew nearer and saw that the old man had only one leg bent under him , the other had been amputated above the knee .
His neighbor on the other side , who lay motionless some distance from him with his head thrown back , was a young soldier with a snub nose .
His pale waxen face was still freckled and his eyes were rolled back .
Rost'ov looked at the young soldier and a cold chill ran down his back .
" Why , this one seems ... " he began , turning to the assistant .
" And how we 've been begging , your honor , " said the old soldier , his jaw quivering .
" He 's been dead since morning .
After all we 're men , not dogs . "
" I 'll send someone at once .
He shall be taken away - taken away at once , " said the assistant hurriedly .
" Let us go , your honor . "
CHAPTER XVIII
Going along the corridor , the assistant led Rost'ov to the officers ' wards , consisting of three rooms , the doors of which stood open .
There were beds in these rooms and the sick and wounded officers were lying or sitting on them .
Some were walking about the rooms in hospital dressing gowns .
Rost'ov looked at him , trying to remember where he had seen him before .
" See where we 've met again ! " said the little man .
"
T'ushin , T'ushin
, do n't you remember , who gave you a lift at Sch"on Grabern ?
And I 've had a bit cut off , you see ...
" he went on with a smile , pointing to the empty sleeve of his dressing gown . "
Looking for Vas'ili Dm'itrich Den'isov ?
My neighbor , " he added , when he heard who Rost'ov wanted . "
Here , here , " and T'ushin led him into the next room , from whence came sounds of several laughing voices .
Den'isov lay asleep on his bed with his head under the blanket , though it was nearly noon .
" Ah , Wost'ov ?
How are you , how are you ? "
His wound , though a slight one , had not yet healed even now , six weeks after he had been hit .
His face had the same swollen pallor as the faces of the other hospital patients , but it was not this that struck Rost'ov .
What struck him was that Den'isov did not seem glad to see him , and smiled at him unnaturally .
He did not ask about the regiment , nor about the general state of affairs , and when Rost'ov spoke of these matters did not listen .
Rost'ov even noticed that Den'isov did not like to be reminded of the regiment , or in general of that other free life which was going on outside the hospital .
He seemed to try to forget that old life and was only interested in the affair with the commissariat officers .
On Rost'ov 's inquiry as to how the matter stood , he at once produced from under his pillow a paper he had received from the commission and the rough draft of his answer to it .
He became animated when he began reading his paper and specially drew Rost'ov 's attention to the stinging rejoinders he made to his enemies .
His hospital companions , who had gathered round Rost'ov - a fresh arrival from the world outside - gradually began to disperse as soon as Den'isov began reading his answer .
Rost'ov noticed by their faces that all those gentlemen had already heard that story more than once and were tired of it .
In the middle of the reading , the Uhlan interrupted Den'isov .
" But what I say is , " he said , turning to Rost'ov , " it would be best simply to petition the Emperor for pardon .
They say great rewards will now be distributed , and surely a pardon would be granted .... "
" Me petition the Empewo ' ! " exclaimed Den'isov , in a voice to which he tried hard to give the old energy and fire , but which sounded like an expression of irritable impotence . "
What for ?
If I were a wobber I would ask mercy , but I 'm being court - martialed for bwinging wobbers to book .
Let them twy me , I 'm not afwaid of anyone .
I 've served the Tsar and my countwy honowably and have not stolen !
And am I to be degwaded ? ...
Listen , I 'm w'iting to them stwaight .
This is what I say : ' If I had wobbed the Tweasuwy ... ' "
" It 's certainly well written , " said T'ushin , " but that 's not the point , Vas'ili Dm'itrich , " and he also turned to Rost'ov .
" One has to submit , and Vas'ili Dm'itrich does n't want to .
You know the auditor told you it was a bad business . "
" Well , let it be bad , " said Den'isov .
" The auditor wrote out a petition for you , " continued T'ushin , " and you ought to sign it and ask this gentleman to take it .
No doubt he " ( indicating Rost'ov ) " has connections on the staff .
You wo n't find a better opportunity . "
" Have n't I said I 'm not going to gwovel ? "
Den'isov interrupted him , went on reading his paper .
He knew his stubborn will and straightforward hasty temper .
Den'isov was moodily silent all the evening .
Late in the evening , when Rost'ov was about to leave , he asked Den'isov whether he had no commission for him .
" It seems it 's no use knocking one 's head against a wall ! " he said , coming from the window and giving Rost'ov a large envelope .
In it was the petition to the Emperor drawn up by the auditor , in which Den'isov , without alluding to the offenses of the commissariat officials , simply asked for pardon .
" Hand it in .
It seems ... "
He did not finish , but gave a painfully unnatural smile .
CHAPTER XIX
Having returned to the regiment and told the commander the state of Den'isov 's affairs , Rost'ov rode to Tilsit with the letter to the Emperor .
On the thirteenth of June the French and Russian Emperors arrived in Tilsit .
Bor'is Drubetsk'oy had asked the important personage on whom he was in attendance , to include him in the suite appointed for the stay at Tilsit .
" I should like to see the great man , " he said , alluding to Napoleon , whom hitherto he , like everyone else , had always called Buonaparte .
" You are speaking of Buonaparte ? " asked the general , smiling .
Bor'is looked at his general inquiringly and immediately saw that he was being tested .
" I am speaking , Prince , of the Emperor Napoleon , " he replied .
The general patted him on the shoulder , with a smile .
" You will go far , " he said , and took him to Tilsit with him .
Bor'is was among the few present at the Niemen on the day the two Emperors met .
Since he had begun to move in the highest circles Bor'is had made it his habit to watch attentively all that went on around him and to note it down .
At the time of the meeting at Tilsit he asked the names of those who had come with Napoleon and about the uniforms they wore , and listened attentively to words spoken by important personages .
At the moment the Emperors went into the pavilion he looked at his watch , and did not forget to look at it again when Alexander came out .
The interview had lasted an hour and fifty - three minutes .
He noted this down that same evening , among other facts he felt to be of historic importance .
He had not only become known , but people had grown accustomed to him and accepted him .
had he been absent .
Bor'is lodged with another adjutant , the Polish Count Zhil'inski .
On the evening of the twenty - fourth of June , Count Zhil'inski arranged a supper for his French friends .
That same day , Rost'ov , profiting by the darkness to avoid being recognized in civilian dress , came to Tilsit and went to the lodging occupied by Bor'is and Zhil'inski .
In the army , Bonaparte and the French were still regarded with mingled feelings of anger , contempt , and fear .
Only recently , talking with one of Pl'atov 's Cossack officers , Rost'ov had argued that if Napoleon were taken prisoner he would be treated not as a sovereign , but as a criminal .
Quite lately , happening to meet a wounded French colonel on the road , Rost'ov had maintained with heat that peace was impossible between a legitimate sovereign and the criminal Bonaparte .
Rost'ov was therefore unpleasantly struck by the presence of French officers in Bor'is ' lodging , dressed in uniforms he had been accustomed to see from quite a different point of view from the outposts of the flank .
As soon as he noticed a French officer , who thrust his head out of the door , that warlike feeling of hostility which he always experienced at the sight of the enemy suddenly seized him .
He stopped at the threshold and asked in Russian whether Drubetsk'oy lived there .
Bor'is , hearing a strange voice in the anteroom , came out to meet him .
An expression of annoyance showed itself for a moment on his face on first recognizing Rost'ov .
" Ah , it 's you ?
Very glad , very glad to see you , " he said , however , coming toward him with a smile .
But Rost'ov had noticed his first impulse .
" I 've come at a bad time I think .
I should not have come , but I have business , " he said coldly .
" No , I only wonder how you managed to get away from your regiment .
Dans un moment je suis ` a vous , " * he said , answering someone who called him .
* " In a minute I shall be at your disposal . "
" I see I 'm intruding , " Rost'ov repeated .
The look of annoyance had already disappeared from Bor'is ' face : having evidently reflected and decided how to act , he very quietly took both Rost'ov 's hands and led him into the next room .
His eyes , looking serenely and steadily at Rost'ov , seemed to be veiled by something , as if screened by blue spectacles of conventionality .
So it seemed to Rost'ov .
" Oh , come now !
" Count Zhil'inski - le Comte N. N .- le Capitaine S. S. , " said he , naming his guests .
Rost'ov looked frowningly at the Frenchmen , bowed reluctantly , and remained silent .
Zhil'inski evidently did not receive this new Russian person very willingly into his circle and did not speak to Rost'ov .
Bor'is did not appear to notice the constraint the newcomer produced and , with the same pleasant composure and the same veiled look in his eyes with which he had met Rost'ov , tried to enliven the conversation .
One of the Frenchmen , with the politeness characteristic of his countrymen , addressed the obstinately taciturn Rost'ov , saying that the latter had probably come to Tilsit to see the Emperor .
" No , I came on business , " replied Rost'ov , briefly .
He really was in their way , for he alone took no part in the conversation which again became general .
The looks the visitors cast on him seemed to say : " And what is he sitting here for ? "
He rose and went up to Bor'is .
" Anyhow , I 'm in your way , " he said in a low tone .
" Come and talk over my business and I 'll go away . "
" Oh , no , not at all , " said Bor'is .
" But if you are tired , come and lie down in my room and have a rest . "
" Yes , really ... "
They went into the little room where Bor'is slept .
When he and Bor'is were alone , Rost'ov felt for the first time that he could not look Bor'is in the face without a sense of awkwardness .
Each time this happened Rost'ov felt uncomfortable and cast down his eyes .
" I have heard of such cases and know that His Majesty is very severe in such affairs .
I think it would be best not to bring it before the Emperor , but to apply to the commander of the corps ....
But in general , I think ... "
" So you do n't want to do anything ?
Well then , say so ! "
Rost'ov almost shouted , not looking Bor'is in the face .
Bor'is smiled .
" On the contrary , I will do what I can .
Only I thought ... "
At that moment Zhil'inski 's voice was heard calling Bor'is .
CHAPTER XX
Rost'ov had come to Tilsit the day least suitable for a petition on Den'isov 's behalf .
On that day , June 27 , the preliminaries of peace were signed .
The Emperors were to be present at that banquet .
Rost'ov felt so ill at ease and uncomfortable with Bor'is that , when the latter looked in after supper , he pretended to be asleep , and early next morning went away , avoiding Bor'is .
In his civilian clothes and a round hat , he wandered about the town , staring at the French and their uniforms and at the streets and houses where the Russian and French Emperors were staying .
In a square he saw tables being set up and preparations made for the dinner ; he saw the Russian and French colors draped from side to side of the streets , with huge monograms A and N.
In the windows of the houses also flags and bunting were displayed .
" Bor'is does n't want to help me and I do n't want to ask him .
That 's settled , " thought Nicholas .
" All is over between us , but I wo n't leave here without having done all I can for Den'isov and certainly not without getting his letter to the Emperor .
The Emperor ! ...
He is here ! "
thought Rost'ov , who had unconsciously returned to the house where Alexander lodged .
Saddled horses were standing before the house and the suite were assembling , evidently preparing for the Emperor to come out .
" I may see him at any moment , " thought Rost'ov .
" If only I were to hand the letter direct to him and tell him all ... could they really arrest me for my civilian clothes ?
Surely not !
He would understand on whose side justice lies .
He understands everything , knows everything .
Who can be more just , more magnanimous than he ?
And even if they did arrest me for being here , what would it matter ?
" thought he , looking at an officer who was entering the house the Emperor occupied . "
After all , people do go in ....
It 's all nonsense !
I 'll go in and hand the letter to the Emperor myself so much the worse for Drubetsk'oy who drives me to it ! "
And suddenly with a determination he himself did not expect , Rost'ov felt for the letter in his pocket and went straight to the house .
" I will fall at his feet and beseech him .
He will lift me up , will listen , and will even thank me . '
I am happy when I can do good , but to remedy injustice is the greatest happiness , ' " Rost'ov fancied the sovereign saying .
And passing people who looked after him with curiosity , he entered the porch of the Emperor 's house .
A broad staircase led straight up from the entry , and to the right he saw a closed door .
Below , under the staircase , was a door leading to the lower floor .
" Whom do you want ? " someone inquired .
" To hand in a letter , a petition , to His Majesty , " said Nicholas , with a tremor in his voice .
" A petition ?
This way , to the officer on duty " ( he was shown the door leading downstairs ) , " only it wo n't be accepted . "
This man was speaking to someone in the adjoining room .
" A good figure and in her first bloom , " he was saying , but on seeing Rost'ov , he stopped short and frowned .
" What is it ?
A petition ? "
" What is it ? " asked the person in the other room .
" Another petitioner , " answered the man with the braces .
" Tell him to come later .
He 'll be coming out directly , we must go . "
" Later ... later !
Tomorrow .
It 's too late ... "
Rost'ov turned and was about to go , but the man in the braces stopped him .
" Whom have you come from ?
Who are you ? "
" I come from Major Den'isov , " answered Rost'ov .
" Are you an officer ? "
" Lieutenant Count Rost'ov . "
" What audacity !
Hand it in through your commander .
And go along with you
... go , " and he continued to put on the uniform the valet handed him .
Rost'ov went back into the hall and noticed that in the porch there were many officers and generals in full parade uniform , whom he had to pass .
" What are you doing here , sir , in civilian dress ? " asked a deep voice .
It was a cavalry general who had obtained the Emperor 's special favor during this campaign , and who had formerly commanded the division in which Rost'ov was serving .
Having heard Rost'ov to the end , the general shook his head gravely .
" I 'm sorry , sorry for that fine fellow .
Give me the letter . "
Hardly had Rost'ov handed him the letter and finished explaining Den'isov 's case , when hasty steps and the jingling of spurs were heard on the stairs , and the general , leaving him , went to the porch .
The gentlemen of the Emperor 's suite ran down the stairs and went to their horses .
Hayne , the same groom who had been at Austerlitz , led up the Emperor 's horse , and the faint creak of a footstep Rost'ov knew at once was heard on the stairs .
And the feeling of enthusiasm and love for his sovereign rose again in Rost'ov 's soul in all its old force .
He stopped and looked about him , brightening everything around by his glance .
He spoke a few words to some of the generals , and , recognizing the former commander of Rost'ov 's division , smiled and beckoned to him .
All the suite drew back and Rost'ov saw the general talking for some time to the Emperor .
The Emperor said a few words to him and took a step toward his horse .
Again the crowd of members of the suite and street gazers ( among whom was Rost'ov ) moved nearer to the Emperor .
Stopping beside his horse , with his hand on the saddle , the Emperor turned to the cavalry general and said in a loud voice , evidently wishing to be heard by all :
" I can not do it , General .
I can not , because the law is stronger than I , " and he raised his foot to the stirrup .
The general bowed his head respectfully , and the monarch mounted and rode down the street at a gallop .
Beside himself with enthusiasm , Rost'ov ran after him with the crowd .
CHAPTER XXI
The Emperor rode to the square where , facing one another , a battalion of the Preobrazh'ensk regiment stood on the right and a battalion of the French Guards in their bearskin caps on the left .
As the Tsar rode up to one flank of the battalions , which presented arms , another group of horsemen galloped up to the opposite flank , and at the head of them Rost'ov recognized Napoleon .
It could be no one else .
He came at a gallop , wearing a small hat , a blue uniform open over a white vest , and the St. Andrew ribbon over his shoulder .
He was riding a very fine thoroughbred gray Arab horse with a crimson gold - embroidered saddlecloth .
On approaching Alexander he raised his hat , and as he did so , Rost'ov , with his cavalryman 's eye , could not help noticing that Napoleon did not sit well or firmly in the saddle .
The battalions shouted " Hurrah ! " and " Vive l'Empereur ! "
Napoleon said something to Alexander , and both Emperors dismounted and took each other 's hands .
Napoleon 's face wore an unpleasant and artificial smile .
Alexander was saying something affable to him .
In spite of the trampling of the French gendarmes ' horses , which were pushing back the crowd , Rost'ov kept his eyes on every movement of Alexander and Bonaparte .
It struck him as a surprise that Alexander treated Bonaparte as an equal and that the latter was quite at ease with the Tsar , as if such relations with an Emperor were an everyday matter to him .
Alexander and Napoleon , with the long train of their suites , approached the right flank of the Preobrazh'ensk battalion and came straight up to the crowd standing there .
The crowd unexpectedly found itself so close to the Emperors that Rost'ov , standing in the front row , was afraid he might be recognized .
" Sire , I ask your permission to present the Legion of Honor to the bravest of your soldiers , " said a sharp , precise voice , articulating every letter .
This was said by the undersized Napoleon , looking up straight into Alexander 's eyes .
Alexander listened attentively to what was said to him and , bending his head , smiled pleasantly .
" Will Your Majesty allow me to consult the colonel ? " said Alexander and took a few hasty steps toward Prince Kozl'ovski , the commander of the battalion .
Bonaparte meanwhile began taking the glove off his small white hand , tore it in doing so , and threw it away .
An aide - de - camp behind him rushed forward and picked it up .
" To whom shall it be given ? " the Emperor Alexander asked Kozl'ovski , in Russian in a low voice .
" To whomever Your Majesty commands . "
The Emperor knit his brows with dissatisfaction and , glancing back , remarked :
" But we must give him an answer . "
Kozl'ovski scanned the ranks resolutely and included Rost'ov in his scrutiny .
" Can it be me ? "
thought Rost'ov .
" L'azarev ! "
the colonel called , with a frown , and L'azarev , the first soldier in the rank , stepped briskly forward .
" Where are you off to ?
Stop here ! "
voices whispered to L'azarev who did not know where to go .
L'azarev stopped , casting a sidelong look at his colonel in alarm .
His face twitched , as often happens to soldiers called before the ranks .
Napoleon slightly turned his head , and put his plump little hand out behind him as if to take something .
Napoleon , without looking , pressed two fingers together and the badge was between them .
Napoleon merely laid the cross on L'azarev 's breast and , dropping his hand , turned toward Alexander as though sure that the cross would adhere there .
And it really did .
Officious hands , Russian and French , immediately seized the cross and fastened it to the uniform .
But receiving no orders , he remained for some time in that rigid position .
The Emperors remounted and rode away .
The Preobrazh'ensk battalion , breaking rank , mingled with the French Guards and sat down at the tables prepared for them .
L'azarev sat in the place of honor .
Russian and French officers embraced him , congratulated him , and pressed his hands .
Crowds of officers and civilians drew near merely to see him .
A rumble of Russian and French voices and laughter filled the air round the tables in the square .
Two officers with flushed faces , looking cheerful and happy , passed by Rost'ov .
" What d'you think of the treat ?
All on silver plate , " one of them was saying .
" Have you seen L'azarev ? "
" I have . "
" Tomorrow , I hear , the Preobrazh'enskis will give them a dinner . "
" Yes , but what luck for L'azarev !
Twelve hundred francs ' pension for life . "
" Here 's a cap , lads ! " shouted a Preobrazh'ensk soldier , donning a shaggy French cap .
" It 's a fine thing !
First - rate ! "
" Have you heard the password ? "
asked one Guards ' officer of another . "
The day before yesterday it was ' Napol'eon , France , bravoure ' ; yesterday , ' Alexandre , Russie , grandeur . '
One day our Emperor gives it and next day Napoleon .
Tomorrow our Emperor will send a St. George 's Cross to the bravest of the French Guards .
It has to be done .
He must respond in kind . "
Bor'is , too , with his friend Zhil'inski , came to see the Preobrazh'ensk banquet .
On his way back , he noticed Rost'ov standing by the corner of a house .
" Rost'ov !
How d'you do ?
We missed one another , " he said , and could not refrain from asking what was the matter , so strangely dismal and troubled was Rost'ov 's face .
" Nothing , nothing , " replied Rost'ov .
" You 'll call round ? "
" Yes , I will . "
Rost'ov stood at that corner for a long time , watching the feast from a distance .
In his mind , a painful process was going on which he could not bring to a conclusion .
Terrible doubts rose in his soul .
Now he remembered Den'isov with his changed expression , his submission , and the whole hospital , with arms and legs torn off and its dirt and disease .
So vividly did he recall that hospital stench of dead flesh that he looked round to see where the smell came from .
Next he thought of that self - satisfied Bonaparte , with his small white hand , who was now an Emperor , liked and respected by Alexander .
Then why those severed arms and legs and those dead men ? ... Then again he thought of L'azarev rewarded and Den'isov punished and unpardoned .
He caught himself harboring such strange thoughts that he was frightened .
The smell of the food the Preobrazh'enskis were eating and a sense of hunger recalled him from these reflections ; he had to get something to eat before going away .
He went to a hotel he had noticed that morning .
There he found so many people , among them officers who , like himself , had come in civilian clothes , that he had difficulty in getting a dinner .
Two officers of his own division joined him .
The conversation naturally turned on the peace .
The officers , his comrades , like most of the army , were dissatisfied with the peace concluded after the battle of Friedland .
They said that had we held out a little longer Napoleon would have been done for , as his troops had neither provisions nor ammunition .
Nicholas ate and drank ( chiefly the latter ) in silence .
He finished a couple of bottles of wine by himself .
The process in his mind went on tormenting him without reaching a conclusion .
He feared to give way to his thoughts , yet could not get rid of them .
Suddenly , on one of the officers ' saying that it was humiliating to look at the French , Rost'ov began shouting with uncalled - for wrath , and therefore much to the surprise of the officers :
" How can you judge what 's best ? "
he cried , the blood suddenly rushing to his face .
" How can you judge the Emperor 's actions ?
What right have we to argue ?
We can not comprehend either the Emperor 's aims or his actions ! "
" But I never said a word about the Emperor ! "
said the officer , justifying himself , and unable to understand Rost'ov 's outburst , except on the supposition that he was drunk .
But Rost'ov did not listen to him .
" We are not diplomatic officials , we are soldiers and nothing more , " he went on .
" If we are ordered to die , we must die .
If we 're punished , it means that we have deserved it , it 's not for us to judge .
If the Emperor pleases to recognize Bonaparte as Emperor and to conclude an alliance with him , it means that that is the right thing to do .
If once we begin judging and arguing about everything , nothing sacred will be left !
That way we shall be saying there is no God - nothing ! "
shouted Nicholas , banging the table - very little to the point as it seemed to his listeners , but quite relevantly to the course of his own thoughts .
" Our business is to do our duty , to fight and not to think !
That 's all .... " said he .
" And to drink , " said one of the officers , not wishing to quarrel .
" Yes , and to drink , " assented Nicholas . "
Hullo there !
Another bottle ! "
he shouted .
In 1808 the Emperor Alexander went to Erfurt for a fresh interview with the Emperor Napoleon , and in the upper circles of Petersburg there was much talk of the grandeur of this important meeting .
CHAPTER XXII
But besides considerations of foreign policy , the attention of Russian society was at that time keenly directed on the internal changes that were being undertaken in all the departments of government .
BOOK SIX : 1808 - 10
CHAPTER I
Prince Andrew had spent two years continuously in the country .
All the plans Pierre had attempted on his estates - and constantly changing from one thing to another had never accomplished - were carried out by Prince Andrew without display and without perceptible difficulty .
He had in the highest degree a practical tenacity which Pierre lacked , and without fuss or strain on his part this set things going .
On one of his estates the three hundred serfs were liberated and became free agricultural laborers - this being one of the first examples of the kind in Russia .
On other estates the serfs ' compulsory labor was commuted for a quitrent .
A trained midwife was engaged for Boguch'arovo at his expense , and a priest was paid to teach reading and writing to the children of the peasants and household serfs .
Prince Andrew spent half his time at Bald Hills with his father and his son , who was still in the care of nurses .
The other half he spent in " Boguch'arovo Cloister , " as his father called Prince Andrew 's estate .
In the spring of 1809 he went to visit the Ryaz'an estates which had been inherited by his son , whose guardian he was .
Warmed by the spring sunshine he sat in the cal`eche looking at the new grass , the first leaves on the birches , and the first puffs of white spring clouds floating across the clear blue sky .
He was not thinking of anything , but looked absent - mindedly and cheerfully from side to side .
They crossed the ferry where he had talked with Pierre the year before .
In the forest it was almost hot , no wind could be felt .
The birches with their sticky green leaves were motionless , and lilac - colored flowers and the first blades of green grass were pushing up and lifting last year 's leaves .
The coarse evergreen color of the small fir trees scattered here and there among the birches was an unpleasant reminder of winter .
On entering the forest the horses began to snort and sweated visibly .
Peter the footman made some remark to the coachman ; the latter assented .
But apparently the coachman 's sympathy was not enough for Peter , and he turned on the box toward his master .
" How pleasant it is , your excellency ! " he said with a respectful smile .
" What ? "
" It 's pleasant , your excellency ! "
" What is he talking about ? " thought Prince Andrew .
" Oh , the spring , I suppose , " he thought as he turned round . "
Yes , really everything is green already ....
How early !
The birches and cherry and alders too are coming out ....
But the oaks show no sign yet .
Ah , here is one oak ! "
At the edge of the road stood an oak .
Probably ten times the age of the birches that formed the forest , it was ten times as thick and twice as tall as they .
It was an enormous tree , its girth twice as great as a man could embrace , and evidently long ago some of its branches had been broken off and its bark scarred .
With its huge ungainly limbs sprawling unsymmetrically , and its gnarled hands and fingers , it stood an aged , stern , and scornful monster among the smiling birch trees .
Only the dead - looking evergreen firs dotted about in the forest , and this oak , refused to yield to the charm of spring or notice either the spring or the sunshine .
" Spring , love , happiness ! "
this oak seemed to say .
" Are you not weary of that stupid , meaningless , constantly repeated fraud ?
Always the same and always a fraud ?
There is no spring , no sun , no happiness !
As he passed through the forest Prince Andrew turned several times to look at that oak , as if expecting something from it .
Under the oak , too , were flowers and grass , but it stood among them scowling , rigid , misshapen , and grim as ever .
" Yes , the oak is right , a thousand times right , " thought Prince Andrew .
" Let others - the young - yield afresh to that fraud , but we know life , our life is finished ! "
A whole sequence of new thoughts , hopeless but mournfully pleasant , rose in his soul in connection with that tree .
CHAPTER II
Prince Andrew had to see the Marshal of the Nobility for the district in connection with the affairs of the Ryaz'an estate of which he was trustee .
This Marshal was Count Ily'a Rost'ov , and in the middle of May Prince Andrew went to visit him .
It was now hot spring weather .
The whole forest was already clothed in green .
It was dusty and so hot
that on passing near water one longed to bathe .
Prince Andrew , depressed and preoccupied with the business about which he had to speak to the Marshal , was driving up the avenue in the grounds of the Rost'ovs ' house at Otr'adnoe .
He heard merry girlish cries behind some trees on the right and saw a group of girls running to cross the path of his cal`eche .
The girl was shouting something but , seeing that he was a stranger , ran back laughing without looking at him .
Suddenly , he did not know why , he felt a pang .
What is she so glad about ?
What is she thinking of ?
Not of the military regulations or of the arrangement of the Ryaz'an serfs ' quitrents .
Of what is she thinking ?
Why is she so happy ? "
Prince Andrew asked himself with instinctive curiosity .
In 1809 Count Ily'a Rost'ov was living at Otr'adnoe just as he had done in former years , that is , entertaining almost the whole province with hunts , theatricals , dinners , and music .
He was glad to see Prince Andrew , as he was to see any new visitor , and insisted on his staying the night .
Why is she so glad ? "
That night , alone in new surroundings , he was long unable to sleep .
He read awhile and then put out his candle , but relit it .
It was hot in the room , the inside shutters of which were closed .
He got up and went to the window to open it .
As soon as he opened the shutters the moonlight , as if it had long been watching for this , burst into the room .
He opened the casement .
The night was fresh , bright , and very still .
Just before the window was a row of pollard trees , looking black on one side and with a silvery light on the other .
Beneath the trees grew some kind of lush , wet , bushy vegetation with silver - lit leaves and stems here and there .
Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the window ledge and his eyes rested on that sky .
His room was on the first floor .
Those in the rooms above were also awake .
He heard female voices overhead .
" Just once more , " said a girlish voice above him which Prince Andrew recognized at once .
" But when are you coming to bed ? " replied another voice .
" I wo n't , I ca n't sleep , what 's the use ?
Come now for the last time . "
Two girlish voices sang a musical passage - the end of some song .
" Oh , how lovely !
Now go to sleep , and there 's an end of it . "
" You go to sleep , but I ca n't , " said the first voice , coming nearer to the window .
She was evidently leaning right out , for the rustle of her dress and even her breathing could be heard .
Everything was stone - still , like the moon and its light and the shadows .
Prince Andrew , too , dared not stir , for fear of betraying his unintentional presence .
" S'onya ! S'onya ! "
he again heard the first speaker . "
Oh , how can you sleep ?
Only look how glorious it is !
Ah , how glorious !
Do wake up , S'onya ! "
she said almost with tears in her voice .
" There never , never was such a lovely night before ! "
S'onya made some reluctant reply .
" Do just come and see what a moon ! ...
Oh , how lovely !
Come here ....
Darling , sweetheart , come here !
There , you see ?
I feel like sitting down on my heels , putting my arms round my knees like this , straining tight , as tight as possible , and flying away !
Like this .... "
" Take care , you 'll fall out . "
He heard the sound of a scuffle and S'onya 's disapproving voice : " It 's past one o'clock . "
" Oh , you only spoil things for me .
All right , go , go ! "
Again all was silent , but Prince Andrew knew she was still sitting there .
From time to time he heard a soft rustle and at times a sigh .
" O God , O God !
What does it mean ?
" she suddenly exclaimed . "
To bed then , if it must be ! "
and she slammed the casement .
" For her I might as well not exist ! " thought Prince Andrew while he listened to her voice , for some reason expecting yet fearing that she might say something about him .
" There she is again !
As if it were on purpose , " thought he .
CHAPTER III
Next morning , having taken leave of no one but the count , and not waiting for the ladies to appear , Prince Andrew set off for home .
It was already the beginning of June when on his return journey he drove into the birch forest where the gnarled old oak had made so strange and memorable an impression on him .
The whole day had been hot .
Somewhere a storm was gathering , but only a small cloud had scattered some raindrops lightly , sprinkling the road and the sappy leaves .
The left side of the forest was dark in the shade , the right side glittered in the sunlight , wet and shiny and scarcely swayed by the breeze .
Everything was in blossom , the nightingales trilled , and their voices reverberated now near , now far away .
" Yes , here in this forest was that oak with which I agreed , " thought Prince Andrew .
" But where is it ? "
he again wondered , gazing at the left side of the road , and without recognizing it he looked with admiration at the very oak he sought .
The old oak , quite transfigured , spreading out a canopy of sappy dark - green foliage , stood rapt and slightly trembling in the rays of the evening sun .
Neither gnarled fingers nor old scars nor old doubts and sorrows were any of them in evidence now .
Through the hard century - old bark , even where there were no twigs , leaves had sprouted such as one could hardly believe the old veteran could have produced .
" Yes , it is the same oak , " thought Prince Andrew , and all at once he was seized by an unreasoning springtime feeling of joy and renewal .
All the best moments of his life suddenly rose to his memory .
" No , life is not over at thirty - one ! "
Prince Andrew suddenly decided finally and decisively .
On reaching home Prince Andrew decided to go to Petersburg that autumn and found all sorts of reasons for this decision .
A whole series of sensible and logical considerations showing it to be essential for him to go to Petersburg , and even to re - enter the service , kept springing up in his mind .
It now seemed clear to him that all his experience of life must be senselessly wasted unless he applied it to some kind of work and again played an active part in life .
Now reason suggested quite the opposite .
Then he would turn away to the portrait of his dead Lise , who with hair curled ` a la grecque looked tenderly and gaily at him out of the gilt frame .
She did not now say those former terrible words to him , but looked simply , merrily , and inquisitively at him .
And if anyone came into his room at such moments he was particularly cold , stern , and above all unpleasantly logical .
" My dear , " Princess Mary entering at such a moment would say , " little Nicholas ca n't go out today , it 's very cold . "
At such moments Princess Mary would think how intellectual work dries men up .
CHAPTER IV
Prince Andrew arrived in Petersburg in August , 1809 .
It was the time when the youthful Sper'anski was at the zenith of his fame and his reforms were being pushed forward with the greatest energy .
That same August the Emperor was thrown from his cal`eche , injured his leg , and remained three weeks at Peterhof , receiving Sper'anski every day and no one else .
Now all these men were replaced by Sper'anski on the civil side , and Arakch'eev on the military .
Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew , as a gentleman of the chamber , presented himself at court and at a levee .
The Emperor , though he met him twice , did not favor him with a single word .
The courtiers explained the Emperor 's neglect of him by His Majesty 's displeasure at Bolk'onski 's not having served since 1805 .
He mentioned what he had written to an old field marshal , a friend of his father 's .
The field marshal made an appointment to see him , received him graciously , and promised to inform the Emperor .
A few days later Prince Andrew received notice that he was to go to see the Minister of War , Count Arakch'eev .
On the appointed day Prince Andrew entered Count Arakch'eev 's waiting room at nine in the morning .
He did not know Arakch'eev personally , had never seen him , and all he had heard of him inspired him with but little respect for the man .
During his service , chiefly as an adjutant , Prince Andrew had seen the anterooms of many important men , and the different types of such rooms were well known to him .
Count Arakch'eev 's anteroom had quite a special character .
Some walked thoughtfully up and down , others whispered and laughed .
Prince Andrew heard the nickname " S'ila Andr'eevich " and the words , " Uncle will give it to us hot , " in reference to Count Arakch'eev .
One general ( an important personage ) , evidently feeling offended at having to wait so long , sat crossing and uncrossing his legs and smiling contemptuously to himself .
But the moment the door opened one feeling alone appeared on all faces - that of fear .
Prince Andrew for the second time asked the adjutant on duty to take in his name , but received an ironical look and was told that his turn would come in due course .
After some others had been shown in and out of the minister 's room by the adjutant on duty , an officer who struck Prince Andrew by his humiliated and frightened air was admitted at that terrible door .
This officer 's audience lasted a long time .
After this Prince Andrew was conducted to the door and the officer on duty said in a whisper , " To the right , at the window . "
Arakch'eev turned his head toward him without looking at him .
" What is your petition ? " asked Arakch'eev .
" I am not petitioning , your excellency , " returned Prince Andrew quietly .
Arakch'eev 's eyes turned toward him .
" Sit down , " said he . "
Prince Bolk'onski ? "
" I am not petitioning about anything .
His Majesty the Emperor has deigned to send your excellency a project submitted by me ... "
There are many laws but no one to carry out the old ones .
Nowadays everybody designs laws , it is easier writing than doing . "
" I came at His Majesty the Emperor 's wish to learn from your excellency how you propose to deal with the memorandum I have presented , " said Prince Andrew politely .
" I have endorsed a resolution on your memorandum and sent it to the committee .
I do not approve of it , " said Arakch'eev , rising and taking a paper from his writing table . "
Here ! "
and he handed it to Prince Andrew .
Across the paper was scrawled in pencil , without capital letters , misspelled , and without punctuation : " Unsoundly constructed because resembles an imitation of the French military code and from the Articles of War needlessly deviating . "
" To what committee has the memorandum been referred ? " inquired Prince Andrew .
" To the Committee on Army Regulations , and I have recommended that your honor should be appointed a member , but without a salary . "
Prince Andrew smiled .
" I do n't want one . "
" A member without salary , " repeated Arakch'eev .
" I have the honor ...
Eh !
Call the next one !
Who else is there ? "
he shouted , bowing to Prince Andrew .
CHAPTER V
While waiting for the announcement of his appointment to the committee Prince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances , particularly those he knew to be in power and whose aid he might need .
Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to secure good reception in the highest and most diverse Petersburg circles of the day .
The party of the old and dissatisfied , who censured the innovations , turned to him expecting his sympathy in their disapproval of the reforms , simply because he was the son of his father .
People talked about him , were interested in him , and wanted to meet him .
The day after his interview with Count Arakch'eev , Prince Andrew spent the evening at Count Kochub'ey 's .
He told the count of his interview with S'ila Andr'eevich ( Kochub'ey spoke of Arakch'eev by that nickname with the same vague irony Prince Andrew had noticed in the Minister of War 's anteroom ) .
" Mon cher , even in this case you ca n't do without Michael Mikh'aylovich Sper'anski .
He manages everything .
I 'll speak to him .
He has promised to come this evening . "
" What has Sper'anski to do with the army regulations ? " asked Prince Andrew .
Kochub'ey shook his head smilingly , as if surprised at Bolk'onski 's simplicity .
" We were talking to him about you a few days ago , " Kochub'ey continued , " and about your freed plowmen . "
" Oh , is it you , Prince , who have freed your serfs ? " said an old man of Catherine 's day , turning contemptuously toward Bolk'onski .
" It was a small estate that brought in no profit , " replied Prince Andrew , trying to extenuate his action so as not to irritate the old man uselessly .
" Afraid of being late ... " said the old man , looking at Kochub'ey .
" There 's one thing I do n't understand , " he continued .
" Who will plow the land if they are set free ?
It is easy to write laws , but difficult to rule ....
Just the same as now
- I ask you , Count - who will be heads of the departments when everybody has to pass examinations ? "
" Those who pass the examinations , I suppose , " replied Kochub'ey , crossing his legs and glancing round .
" Well , I have Pry'anichnikov serving under me , a splendid man , a priceless man , but he 's sixty .
Is he to go up for examination ? "
" Yes , that 's a difficulty , as education is not at all general , but ... "
Count Kochub'ey did not finish .
The newcomer wore a blue swallow - tail coat with a cross suspended from his neck and a star on his left breast .
It was Sper'anski .
Prince Andrew recognized him at once , and felt a throb within him , as happens at critical moments of life .
Whether it was from respect , envy , or anticipation , he did not know .
Sper'anski 's whole figure was of a peculiar type that made him easily recognizable .
Such whiteness and softness Prince Andrew had only seen on the faces of soldiers who had been long in hospital .
This was Sper'anski , Secretary of State , reporter to the Emperor and his companion at Erfurt , where he had more than once met and talked with Napoleon .
Sper'anski did not shift his eyes from one face to another as people involuntarily do on entering a large company and was in no hurry to speak .
He spoke slowly , with assurance that he would be listened to , and he looked only at the person with whom he was conversing .
Prince Andrew followed Sper'anski 's every word and movement with particular attention .
Sper'anski told Kochub'ey he was sorry he had been unable to come sooner as he had been detained at the palace .
He did not say that the Emperor had kept him , and Prince Andrew noticed this affectation of modesty .
When Kochub'ey introduced Prince Andrew , Sper'anski slowly turned his eyes to Bolk'onski with his customary smile and looked at him in silence .
" I am very glad to make your acquaintance .
I had heard of you , as everyone has , " he said after a pause .
Kochub'ey said a few words about the reception Arakch'eev had given Bolk'onski .
Sper'anski smiled more markedly .
He paused at the full stop .
" I hope you will find him sympathetic and ready to co - operate in promoting all that is reasonable . "
A circle soon formed round Sper'anski , and the old man who had talked about his subordinate Pry'anichnikov addressed a question to him .
Prince Andrew was struck by the extraordinarily disdainful composure with which Sper'anski answered the old man .
He appeared to address condescending words to him from an immeasurable height .
When the old man began to speak too loud , Sper'anski smiled and said he could not judge of the advantage or disadvantage of what pleased the sovereign .
Having talked for a little while in the general circle , Sper'anski rose and coming up to Prince Andrew took him along to the other end of the room .
It was clear that he thought it necessary to interest himself in Bolk'onski .
This flattered Prince Andrew .
" No , " said Prince Andrew , " my father did not wish me to take advantage of the privilege .
I began the service from the lower grade . "
" Your father , a man of the last century , evidently stands above our contemporaries who so condemn this measure which merely re - establishes natural justice . "
" I think , however , that these condemnations have some ground , " returned Prince Andrew , trying to resist Sper'anski 's influence , of which he began to be conscious .
He did not like to agree with him in everything and felt a wish to contradict .
Though he usually spoke easily and well , he felt a difficulty in expressing himself now while talking with Sper'anski .
He was too much absorbed in observing the famous man 's personality .
" Grounds of personal ambition maybe , " Sper'anski put in quietly .
" And of state interest to some extent , " said Prince Andrew .
" What do you mean ? " asked Sper'anski quietly , lowering his eyes .
" I am an admirer of Montesquieu , " replied Prince Andrew , " and his idea that le principe des monarchies est l'honneur me para^it incontestable .
Certains droits et privil`eges de la noblesse me paraissent ^etre des moyens de soutenir ce sentiment . "
*
* " The principle of monarchies is honor seems to me incontestable .
Certain rights and privileges for the aristocracy appear to me a means of maintaining that sentiment . "
The smile vanished from Sper'anski 's white face , which was much improved by the change .
Probably Prince Andrew 's thought interested him .
" Si vous envisagez la question sous ce point de vue , " * he began , pronouncing French with evident difficulty , and speaking even slower than in Russian but quite calmly .
* " If you regard the question from that point of view . "
His arguments were concise , simple , and clear .
" I do not dispute that , but it can not be denied that court privileges have attained the same end , " returned Prince Andrew .
" Every courtier considers himself bound to maintain his position worthily . "
" Yet you do not care to avail yourself of the privilege , Prince , " said Sper'anski , indicating by a smile that he wished to finish amiably an argument which was embarrassing for his companion .
Closing his eyes , he bowed ` a la francaise , without taking leave , and trying to attract as little attention as possible , he left the room .
CHAPTER VI
During the first weeks of his stay in Petersburg Prince Andrew felt the whole trend of thought he had formed during his life of seclusion quite overshadowed by the trifling cares that engrossed him in that city .
On returning home in the evening he would jot down in his notebook four or five necessary calls or appointments for certain hours .
The mechanism of life , the arrangement of the day so as to be in time everywhere , absorbed the greater part of his vital energy .
He did nothing , did not even think or find time to think , but only talked , and talked successfully , of what he had thought while in the country .
He sometimes noticed with dissatisfaction that he repeated the same remark on the same day in different circles .
But he was so busy for whole days together that he had no time to notice that he was thinking of nothing .
This first long conversation with Sper'anski only strengthened in Prince Andrew the feeling he had experienced toward him at their first meeting .
He saw in him a remarkable , clear - thinking man of vast intellect who by his energy and persistence had attained power , which he was using solely for the welfare of Russia .
Everything seemed so simple and clear in Sper'anski 's exposition that Prince Andrew involuntarily agreed with him about everything .
If he replied and argued , it was only because he wished to maintain his independence and not submit to Sper'anski 's opinions entirely .
Everything was right and everything was as it should be : only one thing disconcerted Prince Andrew .
This mirrorlike gaze and those delicate hands irritated Prince Andrew , he knew not why .
He was unpleasantly struck , too , by the excessive contempt for others that he observed in Sper'anski , and by the diversity of lines of argument he used to support his opinions .
He made use of every kind of mental device , except analogy , and passed too boldly , it seemed to Prince Andrew , from one to another .
( This last resource was one he very frequently employed . )
In general the trait of Sper'anski 's mentality which struck Prince Andrew most was his absolute and unshakable belief in the power and authority of reason .
And it was just this peculiarity of Sper'anski 's mind that particularly attracted Prince Andrew .
During the first period of their acquaintance Bolk'onski felt a passionate admiration for him similar to that which he had once felt for Bonaparte .
" And that is all the state has for the millions it has spent , " said he .
" We want to give the Senate new juridical powers , but we have no laws .
That is why it is a sin for men like you , Prince , not to serve in these times ! "
Prince Andrew said that for that work an education in jurisprudence was needed which he did not possess .
" But nobody possesses it , so what would you have ?
It is a vicious circle from which we must break a way out . "
A week later Prince Andrew was a member of the Committee on Army Regulations and - what he had not at all expected - was chairman of a section of the committee for the revision of the laws .
CHAPTER VII
Nearly two years before this , in 1808 , Pierre on returning to Petersburg after visiting his estates had involuntarily found himself in a leading position among the Petersburg Freemasons .
He arranged dining and funeral lodge meetings , enrolled new members , and busied himself uniting various lodges and acquiring authentic charters .
He gave money for the erection of temples and supplemented as far as he could the collection of alms , in regard to which the majority of members were stingy and irregular .
He supported almost singlehanded a poorhouse the order had founded in Petersburg .
His life meanwhile continued as before , with the same infatuations and dissipations .
He liked to dine and drink well , and though he considered it immoral and humiliating could not resist the temptations of the bachelor circles in which he moved .
At the same time he felt that the deeper the ground sank under him the closer bound he involuntarily became to the order .
When he had joined the Freemasons he had experienced the feeling of one who confidently steps onto the smooth surface of a bog .
When he put his foot down it sank in .
To make quite sure of the firmness of the ground , he put his other foot down and sank deeper still , became stuck in it , and involuntarily waded knee - deep in the bog .
Joseph Alex'eevich was not in Petersburg - he had of late stood aside from the affairs of the Petersburg lodges , and lived almost entirely in Moscow .
Under the Masonic aprons and insignia he saw the uniforms and decorations at which they aimed in ordinary life .
He divided the Brothers he knew into four categories .
Pierre respected this class of Brothers to which the elder ones chiefly belonged , including , Pierre thought , Joseph Alex'eevich himself , but he did not share their interests .
His heart was not in the mystical aspect of Freemasonry .
In the second category Pierre reckoned himself and others like him , seeking and vacillating , who had not yet found in Freemasonry a straight and comprehensible path , but hoped to do so .
In the third category he included those Brothers ( the majority ) who saw nothing in Freemasonry but the external forms and ceremonies , and prized the strict performance of these forms without troubling about their purport or significance .
Such were Willarski and even the Grand Master of the principal lodge .
Finally , to the fourth category also a great many Brothers belonged , particularly those who had lately joined .
Pierre began to feel dissatisfied with what he was doing .
Freemasonry , at any rate as he saw it here , sometimes seemed to him based merely on externals .
He did not think of doubting Freemasonry itself , but suspected that Russian Masonry had taken a wrong path and deviated from its original principles .
And so toward the end of the year he went abroad to be initiated into the higher secrets of the order .
In the summer of 1809 Pierre returned to Petersburg .
The Petersburg Freemasons all came to see him , tried to ingratiate themselves with him , and it seemed to them all that he was preparing something for them and concealing it .
A solemn meeting of the lodge of the second degree was convened , at which Pierre promised to communicate to the Petersburg Brothers what he had to deliver to them from the highest leaders of their order .
The meeting was a full one .
After the usual ceremonies Pierre rose and began his address .
We are drowsing , but we must act . "
Pierre raised his notebook and began to read .
" To attain this end we must secure a preponderance of virtue over vice and must endeavor to secure that the honest man may , even in this world , receive a lasting reward for his virtue .
But in these great endeavors we are gravely hampered by the political institutions of today .
What is to be done in these circumstances ?
To favor revolutions , overthrow everything , repel force by force ? ...
No !
We are very far from that .
Every violent reform deserves censure , for it quite fails to remedy evil while men remain what they are , and also because wisdom needs no violence .
Only then will our order have the power unobtrusively to bind the hands of the protectors of disorder and to control them without their being aware of it .
This aim was that of Christianity itself .
It taught men to be wise and good and for their own benefit to follow the example and instruction of the best and wisest men .
" At that time , when everything was plunged in darkness , preaching alone was of course sufficient .
The novelty of Truth endowed her with special strength , but now we need much more powerful methods .
It is now necessary that man , governed by his senses , should find in virtue a charm palpable to those senses .
It is impossible to eradicate the passions ; but we must strive to direct them to a noble aim , and it is therefore necessary that everyone should be able to satisfy his passions within the limits of virtue .
Our order should provide means to that end .
This speech not only made a strong impression , but created excitement in the lodge .
The majority of the Brothers , seeing in it dangerous designs of Illuminism , * met it with a coldness that surprised Pierre .
The Grand Master began answering him , and Pierre began developing his views with more and more warmth .
It was long since there had been so stormy a meeting .
Parties were formed , some accusing Pierre of Illuminism , others supporting him .
At that meeting he was struck for the first time by the endless variety of men 's minds , which prevents a truth from ever presenting itself identically to two persons .
* The Illuminati sought to substitute republican for monarchical institutions .
Pierre did not answer him and asked briefly whether his proposal would be accepted .
He was told that it would not , and without waiting for the usual formalities he left the lodge and went home .
CHAPTER VIII
Again Pierre was overtaken by the depression he so dreaded .
For three days after the delivery of his speech at the lodge he lay on a sofa at home receiving no one and going nowhere .
It was just then that he received a letter from his wife , who implored him to see her , telling him how grieved she was about him and how she wished to devote her whole life to him .
At the end of the letter she informed him that in a few days she would return to Petersburg from abroad .
At the same time his mother - in - law , Prince Vas'ili 's wife , sent to him imploring him to come if only for a few minutes to discuss a most important matter .
Pierre saw that there was a conspiracy against him and that they wanted to reunite him with his wife , and in the mood he then was , this was not even unpleasant to him .
Nothing mattered to him .
Nothing in life seemed to him of much importance , and under the influence of the depression that possessed him he valued neither his liberty nor his resolution to punish his wife .
" No one is right and no one is to blame ; so she too is not to blame , " he thought .
If he did not at once give his consent to a reunion with his wife , it was only because in his state of depression he did not feel able to take any step .
Had his wife come to him , he would not have turned her away .
Compared to what preoccupied him , was it not a matter of indifference whether he lived with his wife or not ?
Without replying either to his wife or his mother - in - law , Pierre late one night prepared for a journey and started for Moscow to see Joseph Alex'eevich .
This is what he noted in his diary :
Moscow , 17th November
I have just returned from my benefactor , and hasten to write down what I have experienced .
Joseph Alex'eevich is living poorly and has for three years been suffering from a painful disease of the bladder .
No one has ever heard him utter a groan or a word of complaint .
From morning till late at night , except when he eats his very plain food , he is working at science .
He received me graciously and made me sit down on the bed on which he lay .
I told him everything as best I could , and told him what I had proposed to our Petersburg lodge , of the bad reception I had encountered , and of my rupture with the Brothers .
Joseph Alex'eevich , having remained silent and thoughtful for a good while , told me his view of the matter , which at once lit up for me my whole past and the future path I should follow .
He surprised me by asking whether I remembered the threefold aim of the order : ( 1 ) The preservation and study of the mystery .
( 2 )
The purification and reformation of oneself for its reception , and ( 3 )
The improvement of the human race by striving for such purification .
Which is the principal aim of these three ?
Certainly self - reformation and self - purification .
Only to this aim can we always strive independently of circumstances .
Illuminism is not a pure doctrine , just because it is attracted by social activity and puffed up by pride .
On this ground Joseph Alex'eevich condemned my speech and my whole activity , and in the depth of my soul I agreed with him .
Talking of my family affairs he said to me , " the chief duty of a true Mason , as I have told you , lies in perfecting himself .
Only the vicissitudes of life can show us its vanity and develop our innate love of death or of rebirth to a new life . "
My benefactor then explained to me fully the meaning of the Great Square of creation and pointed out to me that the numbers three and seven are the basis of everything .
Petersburg , 23rd November
I am again living with my wife .
My mother - in - law came to me in tears and said that H'el`ene was here and that she implored me to hear her ; that she was innocent and unhappy at my desertion , and much more .
I knew that if I once let myself see her
I should not have strength to go on refusing what she wanted .
In my perplexity I did not know whose aid and advice to seek .
Had my benefactor been here he would have told me what to do .
But if I forgive her for the sake of doing right , then let union with her have only a spiritual aim .
That is what I decided , and what I wrote to Joseph Alex'eevich .
I told my wife that I begged her to forget the past , to forgive me whatever wrong I may have done her , and that I had nothing to forgive .
It gave me joy to tell her this .
She need not know how hard it was for me to see her again .
I have settled on the upper floor of this big house and am experiencing a happy feeling of regeneration .
CHAPTER IX
At that time , as always happens , the highest society that met at court and at the grand balls was divided into several circles , each with its own particular tone .
The largest of these was the French circle of the Napoleonic alliance , the circle of Count Rumy'antsev and Caulaincourt .
In this group H'el`ene , as soon as she had settled in Petersburg with her husband , took a very prominent place .
She was visited by the members of the French embassy and by many belonging to that circle and noted for their intellect and polished manners .
H'el`ene had been at Erfurt during the famous meeting of the Emperors and had brought from there these connections with the Napoleonic notabilities .
At Erfurt her success had been brilliant .
Napoleon himself had noticed her in the theater and said of her : " C'est un superbe animal . "
*
Her success as a beautiful and elegant woman did not surprise Pierre , for she had become even handsomer than before .
What did surprise him was that during these last two years his wife had succeeded in gaining the reputation "
d ' une femme charmante , aussi spirituelle que belle . "
* ( 2 )
The distinguished Prince de Ligne wrote her eight - page letters .
Bil'ibin saved up his epigrams to produce them in Countess Bez'ukhova 's presence .
To be received in the Countess Bez'ukhova 's salon was regarded as a diploma of intellect .
Pierre , who knew she was very stupid , sometimes attended , with a strange feeling of perplexity and fear , her evenings and dinner parties , where politics , poetry , and philosophy were discussed .
At these parties his feelings were like those of a conjuror who always expects his trick to be found out at any moment .
* " That 's a superb animal . "
* ( 2 ) " Of a charming woman , as witty as she is lovely . "
Pierre was just the husband needed for a brilliant society woman .
He entered his wife 's drawing room as one enters a theater , was acquainted with everybody , equally pleased to see everyone , and equally indifferent to them all .
But the general opinion concerning the queer husband of " the most distinguished woman in Petersburg " was so well established that no one took his freaks seriously .
H'el`ene spoke of him as " mon page " and treated him like a child .
Her smile for him was the same as for everybody , but sometimes that smile made Pierre uncomfortable .
Toward him Bor'is behaved with a particularly dignified and sad deference .
This shade of deference also disturbed Pierre .
" No , now that she has become a bluestocking she has finally renounced her former infatuations , " he told himself .
" There has never been an instance of a bluestocking being carried away by affairs of the heart "- a statement which , though gathered from an unknown source , he believed implicitly .
" What a strange antipathy , " thought Pierre , " yet I used to like him very much . "
But a complex and difficult process of internal development was taking place all this time in Pierre 's soul , revealing much to him and causing him many spiritual doubts and joys .
CHAPTER X
Pierre went on with his diary , and this is what he wrote in it during that time :
24th November
Got up at eight , read the Scriptures , then went to my duties .
( By Joseph Alex'eevich 's advice Pierre had entered the service of the state and served on one of the committees . )
Returned home for dinner and dined alone - the countess had many visitors I do not like .
I ate and drank moderately and after dinner copied out some passages for the Brothers .
In the evening I went down to the countess and told a funny story about B. , and only remembered that I ought not to have done so when everybody laughed loudly at it .
I am going to bed with a happy and tranquil mind .
27th November
I got up late .
On waking I lay long in bed yielding to sloth .
O God , help and strengthen me that I may walk in Thy ways !
Read the Scriptures , but without proper feeling .
Brother Ur'usov came and we talked about worldly vanities .
He told me of the Emperor 's new projects .
My tongue is my enemy .
Brothers G. V. and O. visited me and we had a preliminary talk about the reception of a new Brother .
They laid on me the duty of Rhetor .
I feel myself weak and unworthy .
Then our talk turned to the interpretation of the seven pillars and steps of the Temple , the seven sciences , the seven virtues , the seven vices , and the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit .
Brother O. was very eloquent .
In the evening the admission took place .
The new decoration of the Premises contributed much to the magnificence of the spectacle .
It was Bor'is Drubetsk'oy who was admitted .
I nominated him and was the Rhetor .
A strange feeling agitated me all the time I was alone with him in the dark chamber .
I caught myself harboring a feeling of hatred toward him which I vainly tried to overcome .
That is why I should really like to save him from evil and lead him into the path of truth , but evil thoughts of him did not leave me .
It seemed to me that his object in entering the Brotherhood was merely to be intimate and in favor with members of our lodge .
I could not be eloquent , nor could I frankly mention my doubts to the Brothers and to the Grand Master .
Great Architect of Nature , help me to find the true path out of the labyrinth of lies !
After this , three pages were left blank in the diary , and then the following was written :
I have had a long and instructive talk alone with Brother V. , who advised me to hold fast by Brother A.
Though I am unworthy , much was revealed to me .
Adonai is the name of the creator of the world .
Elohim is the name of the ruler of all .
The third name is the name unutterable which means the All .
Talks with Brother V. strengthen , refresh , and support me in the path of virtue .
In his presence doubt has no place .
The distinction between the poor teachings of mundane science and our sacred all - embracing teaching is clear to me .
Human sciences dissect everything to comprehend it , and kill everything to examine it .
In the holy science of our order all is one , all is known in its entirety and life .
The Trinity - the three elements of matter - are sulphur , mercury , and salt .
Mercury is a fluid , volatile , spiritual essence .
Christ , the Holy Spirit , Him ! ...
3rd December
Awoke late , read the Scriptures but was apathetic .
Afterwards went and paced up and down the large hall .
At the time I gave him no answer .
Now I recalled every detail of that meeting and in my mind gave him the most malevolent and bitter replies .
I recollected myself and drove away that thought only when I found myself glowing with anger , but I did not sufficiently repent .
Afterwards Bor'is Drubetsk'oy came and began relating various adventures .
His coming vexed me from the first , and I said something disagreeable to him .
He replied .
I flared up and said much that was unpleasant and even rude to him .
He became silent , and I recollected myself only when it was too late .
My God , I can not get on with him at all .
The cause of this is my egotism .
I set myself above him and so become much worse than he , for he is lenient to my rudeness while I on the contrary nourish contempt for him .
O God , grant that in his presence I may rather see my own vileness , and behave so that he too may benefit .
After dinner I fell asleep and as I was drowsing off I clearly heard a voice saying in my left ear , " Thy day ! "
I dreamed that I was walking in the dark and was suddenly surrounded by dogs , but I went on undismayed .
Suddenly a smallish dog seized my left thigh with its teeth and would not let go .
I began to throttle it with my hands .
Scarcely had I torn it off before another , a bigger one , began biting me .
I lifted it up , but the higher I lifted it the bigger and heavier it grew .
And suddenly Brother A. came and , taking my arm , led me to a building to enter which we had to pass along a narrow plank .
I stepped on it , but it bent and gave way and I began to clamber up a fence which I could scarcely reach with my hands .
After much effort I dragged myself up , so that my leg hung down on one side and my body on the other .
I looked round and saw Brother A. standing on the fence and pointing me to a broad avenue and garden , and in the garden was a large and beautiful building .
I woke up .
7th December
I dreamed that Joseph Alex'eevich was sitting in my house , and that I was very glad and wished to entertain him .
It seemed as if I chattered incessantly with other people and suddenly remembered that this could not please him , and I wished to come close to him and embrace him .
Then it seemed that we all left the room and something strange happened .
We were sitting or lying on the floor .
And tears came into my eyes , and I was glad he noticed this .
But he looked at me with vexation and jumped up , breaking off his remarks .
He lay down on the edge of it and I burned with longing to caress him and lie down too .
And he said , " Tell me frankly what is your chief temptation ?
Do you know it ?
I think you know it already . "
Abashed by this question , I replied that sloth was my chief temptation .
He shook his head incredulously ; and even more abashed , I said that though I was living with my wife as he advised , I was not living with her as her husband .
To this he replied that one should not deprive a wife of one 's embraces and gave me to understand that that was my duty .
But I replied that I should be ashamed to do it , and suddenly everything vanished .
And I awoke and found in my mind the text from the Gospel :
" The life was the light of men .
And the light shineth in darkness ; and the darkness comprehended it not . "
Joseph Alex'eevich 's face had looked young and bright .
That day I received a letter from my benefactor in which he wrote about " conjugal duties . "
9th December
I had a dream from which I awoke with a throbbing heart .
I saw that I was in Moscow in my house , in the big sitting room , and Joseph Alex'eevich came in from the drawing room .
I seemed to know at once that the process of regeneration had already taken place in him , and I rushed to meet him .
I embraced him and kissed his hands , and he said , " Hast thou noticed that my face is different ?
" I looked at him , still holding him in my arms , and saw that his face was young , but that he had no hair on his head and his features were quite changed .
And I said , " I should have known you had I met you by chance , " and I thought to myself , " Am I telling the truth ? "
I opened the book , and on all the pages there were excellent drawings .
And in my dream I knew that these drawings represented the love adventures of the soul with its beloved .
And on its pages I saw a beautiful representation of a maiden in transparent garments and with a transparent body , flying up to the clouds .
And I seemed to know that this maiden was nothing else than a representation of the Song of Songs .
And looking at those drawings I dreamed I felt that I was doing wrong , but could not tear myself away from them .
Lord , help me !
My God , if Thy forsaking me is Thy doing , Thy will be done ; but if I am myself the cause , teach me what I should do !
I shall perish of my debauchery if Thou utterly desertest me !
CHAPTER XI
The Rost'ovs ' monetary affairs had not improved during the two years they had spent in the country .
Soon after their arrival in Petersburg Berg proposed to V'era and was accepted .
Though in Moscow the Rost'ovs belonged to the best society without themselves giving it a thought , yet in Petersburg their circle of acquaintances was a mixed and indefinite one .
In Petersburg they were provincials , and the very people they had entertained in Moscow without inquiring to what set they belonged , here looked down on them .
The Rost'ovs lived in the same hospitable way in Petersburg as in Moscow , and the most diverse people met at their suppers .
Country neighbors from Otr'adnoe , impoverished old squires and their daughters , Per'onskaya a maid of honor , Pierre Bez'ukhov , and the son of their district postmaster who had obtained a post in Petersburg .
Not in vain had Berg shown everybody his right hand wounded at Austerlitz and held a perfectly unnecessary sword in his left .
He narrated that episode so persistently and with so important an air that everyone believed in the merit and usefulness of his deed , and he had obtained two decorations for Austerlitz .
In the Finnish war he also managed to distinguish himself .
He had picked up the scrap of a grenade that had killed an aide - de - camp standing near the commander in chief and had taken it to his commander .
In 1809 he was a captain in the Guards , wore medals , and held some special lucrative posts in Petersburg .
Now in Petersburg , having considered the Rost'ovs ' position and his own , he decided that the time had come to propose .
* " That girl shall be my wife . "
Berg 's proposal was at first received with a perplexity that was not flattering to him .
So they gave their consent .
But on the contrary , my papa and mamma are now provided for -
I have arranged that rent for them in the Baltic Provinces - and I can live in Petersburg on my pay , and with her fortune and my good management we can get along nicely .
I am not marrying for money - I consider that dishonorable - but a wife should bring her share and a husband his .
I have my position in the service , she has connections and some means .
In our times that is worth something , is n't it ?
But above all , she is a handsome , estimable girl , and she loves me .... "
Berg blushed and smiled .
" And I love her , because her character is sensible and very good .
Now the other sister , though they are the same family , is quite different - an unpleasant character and has not the same intelligence .
She is so ...
you know ? ...
Unpleasant ...
After the first feeling of perplexity aroused in the parents by Berg 's proposal , the holiday tone of joyousness usual at such times took possession of the family , but the rejoicing was external and insincere .
In the family 's feeling toward this wedding a certain awkwardness and constraint was evident , as if they were ashamed of not having loved V'era sufficiently and of being so ready to get her off their hands .
The old count felt this most .
He would probably have been unable to state the cause of his embarrassment , but it resulted from the state of his affairs .
He did not know at all how much he had , what his debts amounted to , or what dowry he could give V'era .
Nor had he any money .
At one time the count thought of giving her the Ryaz'an estate or of selling a forest , at another time of borrowing money on a note of hand .
The count was so disconcerted by this long - foreseen inquiry that without consideration he gave the first reply that came into his head .
" I like your being businesslike about it ....
I like it .
You shall be satisfied .... "
And patting Berg on the shoulder he got up , wishing to end the conversation .
" Because , consider , Count - if I allowed myself to marry now without having definite means to maintain my wife , I should be acting badly .... "
The conversation ended by the count , who wished to be generous and to avoid further importunity , saying that he would give a note of hand for eighty thousand rubles .
Berg smiled meekly , kissed the count on the shoulder , and said that he was very grateful , but that it was impossible for him to arrange his new life without receiving thirty thousand in ready money . "
Or at least twenty thousand , Count
, " he added , " and then a note of hand for only sixty thousand . "
" Yes , yes , all right ! "
said the count hurriedly .
" Only excuse me , my dear fellow , I 'll give you twenty thousand and a note of hand for eighty thousand as well .
Yes , yes !
Kiss me . "
CHAPTER XII
Nat'asha was sixteen and it was the year 1809 , the very year to which she had counted on her fingers with Bor'is after they had kissed four years ago .
Since then she had not seen him .
Before S'onya and her mother , if Bor'is happened to be mentioned , she spoke quite freely of that episode as of some childish , long - forgotten matter that was not worth mentioning .
But in the secret depths of her soul the question whether her engagement to Bor'is was a jest or an important , binding promise tormented her .
Since Bor'is left Moscow in 1805 to join the army he had not seen the Rost'ovs .
He had been in Moscow several times , and had passed near Otr'adnoe , but had never been to see them .
Sometimes it occurred to Nat'asha that he did not wish to see her , and this conjecture was confirmed by the sad tone in which her elders spoke of him .
" Nowadays old friends are not remembered , " the countess would say when Bor'is was mentioned .
When the Rost'ovs came to Petersburg Bor'is called on them .
He drove to their house in some agitation .
The memory of Nat'asha was his most poetic recollection .
But he went with the firm intention of letting her and her parents feel that the childish relations between himself and Nat'asha could not be binding either on her or on him .
When he entered the Rost'ovs ' drawing room
Nat'asha was in her own room .
When she heard of his arrival she almost ran into the drawing room , flushed and beaming with a more than cordial smile .
This expression on his face pleased Nat'asha .
" Well , do you recognize your little madcap playmate ? " asked the countess .
Bor'is kissed Nat'asha 's hand and said that he was astonished at the change in her .
" How handsome you have grown ! "
" I should think so ! " replied Nat'asha 's laughing eyes .
" And is Papa older ? " she asked .
Nat'asha sat down and , without joining in Bor'is ' conversation with the countess , silently and minutely studied her childhood 's suitor .
He felt the weight of that resolute and affectionate scrutiny and glanced at her occasionally .
Bor'is ' uniform , spurs , tie , and the way his hair was brushed were all comme il faut and in the latest fashion .
This Nat'asha noticed at once .
It was not accidentally , Nat'asha felt , that he alluded , when speaking of the highest aristocracy , to an ambassador 's ball he had attended , and to invitations he had received from N.N. and S.S.
All this time Nat'asha sat silent , glancing up at him from under her brows .
This gaze disturbed and confused Bor'is more and more .
He looked round more frequently toward her , and broke off in what he was saying .
He did not stay more than ten minutes , then rose and took his leave .
The same inquisitive , challenging , and rather mocking eyes still looked at him .
Bor'is made up his mind to avoid meeting Nat'asha , but despite that resolution he called again a few days later and began calling often and spending whole days at the Rost'ovs ' .
But he failed to do so and felt awkward about entering on such an explanation .
From day to day he became more and more entangled .
It seemed to her mother and S'onya that Nat'asha was in love with Bor'is as of old .
He left off visiting H'el`ene and received reproachful notes from her every day , and yet he continued to spend whole days with the Rost'ovs .
CHAPTER XIII
The countess - her prayerful mood dispelled - looked round and frowned .
She was finishing her last prayer : "
Can it be that this couch will be my grave ?
" Nat'asha , flushed and eager , seeing her mother in prayer , suddenly checked her rush , half sat down , and unconsciously put out her tongue as if chiding herself .
This couch was high , with a feather bed and five pillows each smaller than the one below .
The countess finished her prayers and came to the bed with a stern face , but seeing , that Nat'asha 's head was covered , she smiled in her kind , weak way .
" Now then , now then ! " said she .
" Mamma , can we have a talk ?
Yes ? " said Nat'asha . "
Now , just one on your throat and another ... that 'll do ! "
And seizing her mother round the neck , she kissed her on the throat .
In her behavior to her mother Nat'asha seemed rough , but she was so sensitive and tactful that however she clasped her mother
she always managed to do it without hurting her or making her feel uncomfortable or displeased .
" Well , what is it tonight ? "
These visits of Nat'asha 's at night before the count returned from his club were one of the greatest pleasures of both mother , and daughter .
" What is it tonight ?-
But I have to tell you ... "
Nat'asha put her hand on her mother 's mouth .
" About Bor'is ...
I know , " she said seriously ; " that 's what I have come about .
Do n't say it - I know .
No , do tell me ! "
and she removed her hand .
" Tell me , Mamma !
He 's nice ? "
" Nat'asha , you are sixteen .
At your age I was married .
You say Bor'is is nice .
He is very nice , and I love him like a son .
But what then ? ...
What are you thinking about ?
You have quite turned his head , I can see that .... "
As she said this the countess looked round at her daughter .
Nat'asha was lying looking steadily straight before her at one of the mahogany sphinxes carved on the corners of the bedstead , so that the countess only saw her daughter 's face in profile .
That face struck her by its peculiarly serious and concentrated expression .
Nat'asha was listening and considering .
" Well , what then ? " said she .
" You have quite turned his head , and why ?
What do you want of him ?
You know you ca n't marry him . "
" Why not ? " said Nat'asha , without changing her position .
" Because he is young , because he is poor , because he is a relation ... and because you yourself do n't love him . "
" How do you know ? "
" I know .
It is not right , darling ! "
" But if I want to ... " said Nat'asha .
" Leave off talking nonsense , " said the countess .
" But if I want to ... "
" Nat'asha , I am in earnest ... "
Nat'asha did not let her finish .
Speak ! "
said she , turning to her mother , who was tenderly gazing at her daughter and in that contemplation seemed to have forgotten all she had wished to say .
" It wo n't do , my love !
He may already have found a suitable and wealthy match , and now he 's half crazy . "
" Crazy ? " repeated Nat'asha .
" I 'll tell you some things about myself .
I had a cousin ... "
" I know !
Cyril Matv'eich ...
but he is old . "
" He was not always old .
But this is what I 'll do , Nat'asha , I 'll have a talk with Bor'is .
He need not come so often .... "
" Why not , if he likes to ? "
" Because I know it will end in nothing .... "
" How can you know ?
No , Mamma , do n't speak to him !
What nonsense ! " said Nat'asha in the tone of one being deprived of her property . "
Well , I wo n't marry , but let him come if he enjoys it and I enjoy it . "
Nat'asha smiled and looked at her mother . "
Not to marry , but just so , " she added .
" How so , my pet ? "
" Just so .
There 's no need for me to marry him .
But ... just so . "
" Just so , just so , " repeated the countess , and shaking all over , she went off into a good humored , unexpected , elderly laugh .
" Do n't laugh , stop ! "
cried Nat'asha .
" You 're shaking the whole bed !
You 're awfully like me , just such another giggler ....
Wait ... "
and she seized the countess ' hands and kissed a knuckle of the little finger , saying , " June , " and continued , kissing , " July , August , " on the other hand . "
But , Mamma , is he very much in love ?
What do you think ?
Was anybody ever so much in love with you ?
And he 's very nice , very , very nice .
Only not quite my taste - he is so narrow , like the dining - room clock ....
Do n't you understand ?
Narrow , you know - gray , light gray ... "
" What rubbish you 're talking ! " said the countess .
Nat'asha continued : " Do n't you really understand ?
Nicholas would understand ....
Bez'ukhov , now , is blue , dark - blue and red , and he is square . "
" You flirt with him too , " said the countess , laughing .
" No , he is a Freemason , I have found out .
He is fine , dark - blue and red ....
How can I explain it to you ? "
" Little countess ! "
the count 's voice called from behind the door .
" You 're not asleep ? "
Nat'asha jumped up , snatched up her slippers , and ran barefoot to her own room .
It was a long time before she could sleep .
She kept thinking that no one could understand all that she understood and all there was in her .
" S'onya ? " she thought , glancing at that curled - up , sleeping little kitten with her enormous plait of hair . "
No , how could she ?
She 's virtuous .
She fell in love with Nicholas and does not wish to know anything more .
Even Mamma does not understand .
There is everything , everything in her , " continued this man .
" She is unusually intelligent , charming ... and then she is pretty , uncommonly pretty , and agile - she swims and rides splendidly ... and her voice !
One can really say it 's a wonderful voice ! "
Next day the countess called Bor'is aside and had a talk with him , after which he ceased coming to the Rost'ovs ' .
CHAPTER XIV
On the thirty - first of December , New Year 's Eve , 1809 - 10 an old grandee of Catherine 's day was giving a ball and midnight supper .
The diplomatic corps and the Emperor himself were to be present .
The grandee 's well - known mansion on the English Quay glittered with innumerable lights .
Police were stationed at the brightly lit entrance which was carpeted with red baize , and not only gendarmes but dozens of police officers and even the police master himself stood at the porch .
Carriages kept driving away and fresh ones arriving , with red - liveried footmen and footmen in plumed hats .
Almost every time a new carriage drove up a whisper ran through the crowd and caps were doffed .
" The Emperor ? ...
No , a minister ... prince ... ambassador .
Do n't you see the plumes ? ... " was whispered among the crowd .
One person , better dressed than the rest , seemed to know everyone and mentioned by name the greatest dignitaries of the day .
A third of the visitors had already arrived , but the Rost'ovs , who were to be present , were still hurrying to get dressed .
M'arya Ign'atevna
They were to call for her at her house in the Taurida Gardens at ten o'clock , but it was already five minutes to ten , and the girls were not yet dressed .
Nat'asha was going to her first grand ball .
She had got up at eight that morning and had been in a fever of excitement and activity all day .
All her powers since morning had been concentrated on ensuring that they all - she herself , Mamma , and S'onya - should be as well dressed as possible .
S'onya and her mother put themselves entirely in her hands .
The countess was to wear a claret - colored velvet dress , and the two girls white gauze over pink silk slips , with roses on their bodices and their hair dressed ` a la grecque .
S'onya was finishing dressing and so was the countess , but Nat'asha , who had bustled about helping them all , was behindhand .
She was still sitting before a looking - glass with a dressing jacket thrown over her slender shoulders .
S'onya stood ready dressed in the middle of the room and , pressing the head of a pin till it hurt her dainty finger , was fixing on a last ribbon that squeaked as the pin went through it .
" That bow is not right .
Come here ! "
S'onya sat down and Nat'asha pinned the ribbon on differently .
" Allow me , Miss !
I ca n't do it like that , " said the maid who was holding Nat'asha 's hair .
" Oh , dear !
Well then , wait .
That 's right , S'onya . "
" Are n't you ready ?
It is nearly ten , " came the countess ' voice .
" Directly !
Directly !
And you , Mamma ? "
" I have only my cap to pin on . "
" Do n't do it without me ! "
called Nat'asha .
" You wo n't do it right . "
" But it 's already ten . "
They had decided to be at the ball by half - past ten , and Nat'asha had still to get dressed and they had to call at the Taurida Gardens .
Turning her mother 's head this way and that , she fastened on the cap and , hurriedly kissing her gray hair , ran back to the maids who were turning up the hem of her skirt .
The cause of the delay was Nat'asha 's skirt , which was too long .
Two maids were turning up the hem and hurriedly biting off the ends of thread .
A third with pins in her mouth was running about between the countess and S'onya , and a fourth held the whole of the gossamer garment up high on one uplifted hand .
" M'avra , quicker , darling ! "
" Give me my thimble , Miss , from there ... "
" Whenever will you be ready ? " asked the count coming to the door . "
Here is some scent .
Per'onskaya must be tired of waiting . "
Nat'asha began putting on the dress .
" In a minute !
In a minute !
Do n't come in , Papa ! "
she cried to her father as he opened the door - speaking from under the filmy skirt which still covered her whole face .
S'onya slammed the door to .
A minute later they let the count in .
He was wearing a blue swallow - tail coat , shoes and stockings , and was perfumed and his hair pomaded .
" Oh , Papa ! how nice you look !
Charming ! "
cried Nat'asha , as she stood in the middle of the room smoothing out the folds of the gauze .
" Say what you like , " exclaimed S'onya , in a despairing voice as she looked at Nat'asha , " say what you like , it 's still too long . "
Nat'asha stepped back to look at herself in the pier glass .
The dress was too long .
" Really , madam , it is not at all too long , " said M'avra , crawling on her knees after her young lady .
" Well , if it 's too long we 'll tack it up
At that moment , with soft steps , the countess came in shyly , in her cap and velvet gown .
" Oo - oo , my beauty ! " exclaimed the count , " she looks better than any of you ! "
He would have embraced her but , blushing , she stepped aside fearing to be rumpled .
" Mamma , your cap , more to this side , " said Nat'asha .
" I 'll arrange it , " and she rushed forward so that the maids who were tacking up her skirt could not move fast enough and a piece of gauze was torn off .
" Oh goodness !
What has happened ?
Really it was not my fault ! "
" Never mind , I 'll run it up , it wo n't show , " said Duny'asha .
" What a beauty - a very queen ! " said the nurse as she came to the door . "
And S'onya !
They are lovely ! "
At a quarter past ten they at last got into their carriages and started .
But they had still to call at the Taurida Gardens .
Per'onskaya was quite ready .
In spite of her age and plainness she had gone through the same process as the Rost'ovs , but with less flurry - for to her it was a matter of routine .
Her ugly old body was washed , perfumed , and powdered in just the same way .
She praised the Rost'ovs ' toilets .
They praised her taste and toilet , and at eleven o'clock , careful of their coiffures and dresses , they settled themselves in their carriages and drove off .
CHAPTER XV
Nat'asha had not had a moment free since early morning and had not once had time to think of what lay before her .
The prospect was so splendid that she hardly believed it would come true , so out of keeping was it with the chill darkness and closeness of the carriage .
Only then did she remember how she must behave at a ball , and tried to assume the majestic air she considered indispensable for a girl on such an occasion .
But , fortunately for her , she felt her eyes growing misty , she saw nothing clearly , her pulse beat a hundred to the minute , and the blood throbbed at her heart .
She could not assume that pose , which would have made her ridiculous , and she moved on almost fainting from excitement and trying with all her might to conceal it .
And this was the very attitude that became her best .
Before and behind them other visitors were entering , also talking in low tones and wearing ball dresses .
The mirrors on the landing reflected ladies in white , pale - blue , and pink dresses , with diamonds and pearls on their bare necks and arms .
Nat'asha looked in the mirrors and could not distinguish her reflection from the others .
All was blended into one brilliant procession .
On entering the ballroom the regular hum of voices , footsteps , and greetings deafened Nat'asha , and the light and glitter dazzled her still more .
* " Delighted to see you . "
The two girls in their white dresses , each with a rose in her black hair , both curtsied in the same way , but the hostess ' eye involuntarily rested longer on the slim Nat'asha .
She looked at her and gave her alone a special smile in addition to her usual smile as hostess .
Looking at her she may have recalled the golden , irrecoverable days of her own girlhood and her own first ball .
The host also followed Nat'asha with his eyes and asked the count which was his daughter .
" Charming ! " said he , kissing the tips of his fingers .
In the ballroom guests stood crowding at the entrance doors awaiting the Emperor .
The countess took up a position in one of the front rows of that crowd .
Nat'asha heard and felt that several people were asking about her and looking at her .
She realized that those noticing her liked her , and this observation helped to calm her .
" There are some like ourselves and some worse , " she thought .
Per'onskaya was pointing out to the countess the most important people at the ball .
" That is the Dutch ambassador , do you see ?
That gray - haired man , " she said , indicating an old man with a profusion of silver - gray curly hair , who was surrounded by ladies laughing at something he said .
" Ah , here she is , the Queen of Petersburg , Countess Bez'ukhova , " said Per'onskaya , indicating H'el`ene who had just entered .
" How lovely !
She is quite equal to M'arya Ant'onovna .
See how the men , young and old , pay court to her .
Beautiful and clever ... they say Prince -- is quite mad about her .
But see , those two , though not good - looking , are even more run after . "
She pointed to a lady who was crossing the room followed by a very plain daughter .
" She is a splendid match , a millionairess , " said Per'onskaya . "
And look , here come her suitors . "
He 's handsome , is n't he ?
I hear they will marry him to that rich girl .
But your cousin , Drubetsk'oy , is also very attentive to her .
They say she has millions .
Oh yes , that 's the French ambassador himself ! "
she replied to the countess ' inquiry about Caulaincourt . "
Looks as if he were a king !
All the same , the French are charming , very charming .
No one more charming in society .
Ah , here she is !
Yes , she is still the most beautiful of them all , our M'arya Ant'onovna !
And how simply she is dressed !
Lovely !
And that stout one in spectacles is the universal Freemason , " she went on , indicating Pierre . "
Put him beside his wife and he looks a regular buffoon ! "
Pierre , swaying his stout body , advanced , making way through the crowd and nodding to right and left as casually and good - naturedly as if he were passing through a crowd at a fair .
He pushed through , evidently looking for someone .
Nat'asha looked joyfully at the familiar face of Pierre , " the buffoon , " as Per'onskaya had called him , and knew he was looking for them , and for her in particular .
He had promised to be at the ball and introduce partners to her .
But before he reached them Pierre stopped beside a very handsome , dark man of middle height , and in a white uniform , who stood by a window talking to a tall man wearing stars and a ribbon .
Nat'asha at once recognized the shorter and younger man in the white uniform : it was Bolk'onski , who seemed to her to have grown much younger , happier , and better - looking .
" There 's someone else we know - Bolk'onski , do you see , Mamma ? " said Nat'asha , pointing out Prince Andrew .
" You remember , he stayed a night with us at Otr'adnoe . "
" Oh , you know him ? " said Per'onskaya .
" I ca n't bear him .
Il fait ` a pr'esent la pluie et le beau temps .
* He 's too proud for anything .
Takes after his father .
And he 's hand in glove with Sper'anski , writing some project or other .
Just look how he treats the ladies !
There 's one talking to him and he has turned away , " she said , pointing at him .
" I 'd give it to him if he treated me as he does those ladies . "
* " He is all the rage just now . "
CHAPTER XVI
Suddenly everybody stirred , began talking , and pressed forward and then back , and between the two rows , which separated , the Emperor entered to the sounds of music that had immediately struck up .
Behind him walked his host and hostess .
He walked in rapidly , bowing to right and left as if anxious to get the first moments of the reception over .
The band played the polonaise in vogue at that time on account of the words that had been set to it , beginning : " Alexander , Elisaveta , all our hearts you ravish quite ... "
The Emperor passed on to the drawing room , the crowd made a rush for the doors , and several persons with excited faces hurried there and back again .
Then the crowd hastily retired from the drawing room door , at which the Emperor reappeared talking to the hostess .
A young man , looking distraught , pounced down on the ladies , asking them to move aside .
Some ladies , with faces betraying complete forgetfulness of all the rules of decorum , pushed forward to the detriment of their toilets .
The men began to choose partners and take their places for the polonaise .
Everyone moved back , and the Emperor came smiling out of the drawing room leading his hostess by the hand but not keeping time to the music .
The host followed with M'arya Ant'onovna Nar'yshkina ; then came ambassadors , ministers , and various generals , whom Per'onskaya diligently named .
More than half the ladies already had partners and were taking up , or preparing to take up , their positions for the polonaise .
Nat'asha felt that she would be left with her mother and S'onya among a minority of women who crowded near the wall , not having been invited to dance .
She was not concerned about the Emperor or any of those great people whom Per'onskaya was pointing out -
she had but one thought : "
Is it possible
no one will ask me , that I shall not be among the first to dance ?
Is it possible that not one of all these men will notice me ?
No , it 's impossible , " she thought .
" They must know how I long to dance , how splendidly I dance , and how they would enjoy dancing with me . "
The strains of the polonaise , which had continued for a considerable time , had begun to sound like a sad reminiscence to Nat'asha 's ears .
She wanted to cry .
Per'onskaya had left them .
The count was at the other end of the room .
She and the countess and S'onya were standing by themselves as in the depths of a forest amid that crowd of strangers , with no one interested in them and not wanted by anyone .
Prince Andrew with a lady passed by , evidently not recognizing them .
The handsome Anatole was smilingly talking to a partner on his arm and looked at Nat'asha as one looks at a wall .
Bor'is passed them twice and each time turned away .
Berg and his wife , who were not dancing , came up to them .
This family gathering seemed humiliating to Nat'asha - as if there were nowhere else for the family to talk but here at the ball .
She did not listen to or look at V'era , who was telling her something about her own green dress .
At last the Emperor stopped beside his last partner ( he had danced with three ) and the music ceased .
The Emperor looked smilingly down the room .
A minute passed but no one had yet begun dancing .
An aide - de - camp , the Master of Ceremonies , went up to Countess Bez'ukhova and asked her to dance .
She smilingly raised her hand and laid it on his shoulder without looking at him .
Nat'asha gazed at them and was ready to cry because it was not she who was dancing that first turn of the waltz .
Prince Andrew , in the white uniform of a cavalry colonel , wearing stockings and dancing shoes , stood looking animated and bright in the front row of the circle not far from the Rost'ovs .
Baron Firhoff was talking to him about the first sitting of the Council of State to be held next day .
Prince Andrew , as one closely connected with Sper'anski and participating in the work of the legislative commission , could give reliable information about that sitting , concerning which various rumors were current .
But not listening to what Firhoff was saying , he was gazing now at the sovereign and now at the men intending to dance who had not yet gathered courage to enter the circle .
Prince Andrew was watching these men abashed by the Emperor 's presence , and the women who were breathlessly longing to be asked to dance .
Pierre came up to him and caught him by the arm .
" You always dance .
I have a prot'eg'ee , the young Rost'ova , here .
Ask her , " he said .
" Where is she ? " asked Bolk'onski . "
Excuse me ! "
he added , turning to the baron , " we will finish this conversation elsewhere - at a ball one must dance . "
He stepped forward in the direction Pierre indicated .
The despairing , dejected expression of Nat'asha 's face caught his eye .
He recognized her , guessed her feelings , saw that it was her d'ebut , remembered her conversation at the window , and with an expression of pleasure on his face approached Countess Rost'ova .
" Allow me to introduce you to my daughter , " said the countess , with heightened color .
He asked her to waltz .
That tremulous expression on Nat'asha 's face , prepared either for despair or rapture , suddenly brightened into a happy , grateful , childlike smile .
" I have long been waiting for you , " that frightened happy little girl seemed to say by the smile that replaced the threatened tears , as she raised her hand to Prince Andrew 's shoulder .
They were the second couple to enter the circle .
Prince Andrew was one of the best dancers of his day and Nat'asha danced exquisitely .
Her little feet in their white satin dancing shoes did their work swiftly , lightly , and independently of herself , while her face beamed with ecstatic happiness .
Her slender bare arms and neck were not beautiful - compared to H'el`ene 's her shoulders looked thin and her bosom undeveloped .
CHAPTER XVII
She noticed and saw nothing of what occupied everyone else .
For one of the merry cotillions before supper Prince Andrew was again her partner .
He reminded her of their first encounter in the Otr'adnoe avenue , and how she had been unable to sleep that moonlight night , and told her how he had involuntarily overheard her .
Nat'asha blushed at that recollection and tried to excuse herself , as if there had been something to be ashamed of in what Prince Andrew had overheard .
Like all men who have grown up in society , Prince Andrew liked meeting someone there not of the conventional society stamp .
And such was Nat'asha , with her surprise , her delight , her shyness , and even her mistakes in speaking French .
With her he behaved with special care and tenderness , sitting beside her and talking of the simplest and most unimportant matters ; he admired her shy grace .
In the middle of the cotillion , having completed one of the figures , Nat'asha , still out of breath , was returning to her seat when another dancer chose her .
She was tired and panting and evidently thought of declining , but immediately put her hand gaily on the man 's shoulder , smiling at Prince Andrew .
When her partner left her Nat'asha ran across the room to choose two ladies for the figure .
" If she goes to her cousin first and then to another lady , she will be my wife , " said Prince Andrew to himself quite to his own surprise , as he watched her .
She did go first to her cousin .
" What rubbish sometimes enters one 's head ! "
thought Prince Andrew , " but what is certain is that that girl is so charming , so original , that she wo n't be dancing here a month before she will be married ....
Such as she are rare here , " he thought , as Nat'asha , readjusting a rose that was slipping on her bodice , settled herself beside him .
When the cotillion was over the old count in his blue coat came up to the dancers .
He invited Prince Andrew to come and see them , and asked his daughter whether she was enjoying herself .
Nat'asha did not answer at once but only looked up with a smile that said reproachfully : " How can you ask such a question ? "
" I have never enjoyed myself so much before ! " she said , and Prince Andrew noticed how her thin arms rose quickly as if to embrace her father and instantly dropped again .
Nat'asha was happier than she had ever been in her life .
She was at that height of bliss when one becomes completely kind and good and does not believe in the possibility of evil , unhappiness , or sorrow .
At that ball Pierre for the first time felt humiliated by the position his wife occupied in court circles .
He was gloomy and absent - minded .
A deep furrow ran across his forehead , and standing by a window he stared over his spectacles seeing no one .
On her way to supper Nat'asha passed him .
Pierre 's gloomy , unhappy look struck her .
She stopped in front of him .
She wished to help him , to bestow on him the superabundance of her own happiness .
" How delightful it is , Count ! " said she .
" Is n't it ? "
Pierre smiled absent - mindedly , evidently not grasping what she said .
" Yes , I am very glad , " he said .
" How can people be dissatisfied with anything ? " thought Nat'asha . "
Especially such a capital fellow as Bez'ukhov ! "
CHAPTER XVIII
Next day Prince Andrew thought of the ball , but his mind did not dwell on it long . "
Yes , it was a very brilliant ball , " and then ... "
Yes , that little Rost'ova is very charming .
There 's something fresh , original , un - Petersburg - like about her that distinguishes her . "
That was all he thought about yesterday 's ball , and after his morning tea he set to work .
But either from fatigue or want of sleep he was ill - disposed for work and could get nothing done .
He kept criticizing his own work , as he often did , and was glad when he heard someone coming .
Hardly had he got rid of his hat before he ran into Prince Andrew 's room with a preoccupied air and at once began talking .
He had just heard particulars of that morning 's sitting of the Council of State opened by the Emperor , and he spoke of it enthusiastically .
The Emperor 's speech had been extraordinary .
It had been a speech such as only constitutional monarchs deliver . "
The Sovereign plainly said that the Council and Senate are estates of the realm , he said that the government must rest not on authority but on secure bases .
The Emperor said that the fiscal system must be reorganized and the accounts published , " recounted B'itski , emphasizing certain words and opening his eyes significantly .
" Ah , yes !
Today 's events mark an epoch , the greatest epoch in our history , " he concluded .
He listened with quiet irony to B'itski 's enthusiastic account of it .
A very simple thought occurred to him : " What does it matter to me or to B'itski what the Emperor was pleased to say at the Council ?
Can all that make me any happier or better ? "
And this simple reflection suddenly destroyed all the interest Prince Andrew had felt in the impending reforms .
He was going to dine that evening at Sper'anski 's , " with only a few friends , " as the host had said when inviting him .
At the appointed hour , however , he entered the modest house Sper'anski owned in the Taurida Gardens .
There were no ladies present except Sper'anski 's little daughter ( long - faced like her father ) and her governess .
The other guests were Gervais , Magn'itski , and Stol'ypin .
While still in the anteroom Prince Andrew heard loud voices and a ringing staccato laugh - a laugh such as one hears on the stage .
Someone - it sounded like Sper'anski - was distinctly ejaculating ha - ha - ha .
Prince Andrew had never before heard Sper'anski 's famous laugh , and this ringing , high - pitched laughter from a statesman made a strange impression on him .
He entered the dining room .
The whole company were standing between two windows at a small table laid with hors - d'oeuvres .
His guests surrounded him .
Magn'itski , addressing himself to Sper'anski , was relating an anecdote , and Sper'anski was laughing in advance at what Magn'itski was going to say .
When Prince Andrew entered the room Magn'itski 's words were again crowned by laughter .
Stol'ypin gave a deep bass guffaw as he munched a piece of bread and cheese .
Gervais laughed softly with a hissing chuckle , and Sper'anski in a high - pitched staccato manner .
Still laughing , Sper'anski held out his soft white hand to Prince Andrew .
" Very pleased to see you , Prince , " he said .
" One moment ... " he went on , turning to Magn'itski and interrupting his story .
" We have agreed that this is a dinner for recreation , with not a word about business ! " and turning again to the narrator he began to laugh afresh .
Prince Andrew looked at the laughing Sper'anski with astonishment , regret , and disillusionment .
It seemed to him that this was not Sper'anski but someone else .
Everything that had formerly appeared mysterious and fascinating in Sper'anski suddenly became plain and unattractive .
At dinner the conversation did not cease for a moment and seemed to consist of the contents of a book of funny anecdotes .
Before Magn'itski had finished his story someone else was anxious to relate something still funnier .
Most of the anecdotes , if not relating to the state service , related to people in the service .
It seemed that in this company the insignificance of those people was so definitely accepted that the only possible attitude toward them was one of good humored ridicule .
Sper'anski related how at the Council that morning a deaf dignitary , when asked his opinion , replied that he thought so too .
Gervais gave a long account of an official revision , remarkable for the stupidity of everybody concerned .
Stol'ypin , stuttering , broke into the conversation and began excitedly talking of the abuses that existed under the former order of things - threatening to give a serious turn to the conversation .
Magn'itski starting quizzing Stol'ypin about his vehemence .
Gervais intervened with a joke , and the talk reverted to its former lively tone .
Evidently Sper'anski liked to rest after his labors and find amusement in a circle of friends , and his guests , understanding his wish , tried to enliven him and amuse themselves .
But their gaiety seemed to Prince Andrew mirthless and tiresome .
Sper'anski 's high - pitched voice struck him unpleasantly , and the incessant laughter grated on him like a false note .
Prince Andrew did not laugh and feared that he would be a damper on the spirits of the company , but no one took any notice of his being out of harmony with the general mood .
They all seemed very gay .
He tried several times to join in the conversation , but his remarks were tossed aside each time like a cork thrown out of the water , and he could not jest with them .
After dinner Sper'anski 's daughter and her governess rose .
He patted the little girl with his white hand and kissed her .
And that gesture , too , seemed unnatural to Prince Andrew .
The men remained at table over their port - English fashion .
In the midst of a conversation that was started about Napoleon 's Spanish affairs , which they all agreed in approving , Prince Andrew began to express a contrary opinion .
Sper'anski smiled and , with an evident wish to prevent the conversation from taking an unpleasant course , told a story that had no connection with the previous conversation .
For a few moments all were silent .
Having sat some time at table , Sper'anski corked a bottle of wine and , remarking , " Nowadays good wine rides in a carriage and pair , " passed it to the servant and got up .
All rose and continuing to talk loudly went into the drawing room .
Two letters brought by a courier were handed to Sper'anski and he took them to his study .
As soon as he had left the room the general merriment stopped and the guests began to converse sensibly and quietly with one another .
" Now for the recitation ! " said Sper'anski on returning from his study .
"
A wonderful talent !
" he said to Prince Andrew , and Magn'itski immediately assumed a pose and began reciting some humorous verses in French which he had composed about various well - known Petersburg people .
He was interrupted several times by applause .
When the verses were finished Prince Andrew went up to Sper'anski and took his leave .
" Where are you off to so early ? " asked Sper'anski .
" I promised to go to a reception . "
They said no more .
That precise , mirthless laughter rang in Prince Andrew 's ears long after he had left the house .
When he reached home
Prince Andrew began thinking of his life in Petersburg during those last four months as if it were something new .
He thought of the meetings of a committee of which Berg was a member .
He remembered how carefully and at what length everything relating to form and procedure was discussed at those meetings , and how sedulously and promptly all that related to the gist of the business was evaded .
He recalled his labors on the Legal Code , and how painstakingly he had translated the articles of the Roman and French codes into Russian , and he felt ashamed of himself .
CHAPTER XIX
Next day Prince Andrew called at a few houses he had not visited before , and among them at the Rost'ovs ' with whom he had renewed acquaintance at the ball .
Apart from considerations of politeness which demanded the call , he wanted to see that original , eager girl who had left such a pleasant impression on his mind , in her own home .
Nat'asha was one of the first to meet him .
She was wearing a dark - blue house dress in which Prince Andrew thought her even prettier than in her ball dress .
She and all the Rost'ov family welcomed him as an old friend , simply and cordially .
The whole family , whom he had formerly judged severely , now seemed to him to consist of excellent , simple , and kindly people .
The old count 's hospitality and good nature , which struck one especially in Petersburg as a pleasant surprise , were such that Prince Andrew could not refuse to stay to dinner . "
Now this world disconcerted him no longer and was no longer alien to him , but he himself having entered it found in it a new enjoyment .
After dinner Nat'asha , at Prince Andrew 's request , went to the clavichord and began singing .
Prince Andrew stood by a window talking to the ladies and listened to her .
In the midst of a phrase he ceased speaking and suddenly felt tears choking him , a thing he had thought impossible for him .
He looked at Nat'asha as she sang , and something new and joyful stirred in his soul .
He felt happy and at the same time sad .
He had absolutely nothing to weep about yet he was ready to weep .
What about ?
His former love ?
The little princess ?
His disillusionments ? ...
His hopes for the future ? ...
Yes and no .
The chief reason was a sudden , vivid sense of the terrible contrast between something infinitely great and illimitable within him and that limited and material something that he , and even she , was .
This contrast weighed on and yet cheered him while she sang .
As soon as Nat'asha had finished she went up to him and asked how he liked her voice .
She asked this and then became confused , feeling that she ought not to have asked it .
He smiled , looking at her , and said he liked her singing as he liked everything she did .
Prince Andrew left the Rost'ovs ' late in the evening .
He went to bed from habit , but soon realized that he could not sleep .
It did not enter his head that he was in love with Nat'asha ; he was not thinking about her , but only picturing her to himself , and in consequence all life appeared in a new light .
" Why do I strive , why do I toil in this narrow , confined frame , when life , all life with all its joys , is open to me ? " said he to himself .
And for the first time for a very long while he began making happy plans for the future .
" I must use my freedom while I feel so much strength and youth in me , " he said to himself .
" Pierre was right when he said one must believe in the possibility of happiness in order to be happy , and now I do believe in it .
Let the dead bury their dead , but while one has life one must live and be happy ! "
thought he .
CHAPTER XX
One morning Colonel Berg , whom Pierre knew as he knew everybody in Moscow and Petersburg , came to see him .
Berg arrived in an immaculate brand - new uniform , with his hair pomaded and brushed forward over his temples as the Emperor Alexander wore his hair .
" I have just been to see the countess , your wife .
Unfortunately she could not grant my request , but I hope , Count , I shall be more fortunate with you , " he said with a smile .
" What is it you wish , Colonel ?
I am at your service . "
( He smiled still more pleasantly . )
" I wished to ask the countess and you to do me the honor of coming to tea and to supper . "
Only Countess H'el`ene , considering the society of such people as the Bergs beneath her , could be cruel enough to refuse such an invitation .
" But do n't be late , Count , if I may venture to ask ; about ten minutes to eight , please .
We shall make up a rubber .
Our general is coming .
He is very good to me .
We shall have supper , Count .
So you will do me the favor . "
Contrary to his habit of being late , Pierre on that day arrived at the Bergs ' house , not at ten but at fifteen minutes to eight .
Having prepared everything necessary for the party , the Bergs were ready for their guests ' arrival .
In their new , clean , and light study with its small busts and pictures and new furniture sat Berg and his wife .
Berg , closely buttoned up in his new uniform , sat beside his wife explaining to her that one always could and should be acquainted with people above one , because only then does one get satisfaction from acquaintances .
" You can get to know something , you can ask for something .
See how I managed from my first promotion . "
( Berg measured his life not by years but by promotions . )
" My comrades are still nobodies , while I am only waiting for a vacancy to command a regiment , and have the happiness to be your husband . "
( He rose and kissed V'era 's hand , and on the way to her straightened out a turned - up corner of the carpet . ) "
And how have I obtained all this ?
Chiefly by knowing how to choose my aquaintances .
It goes without saying that one must be conscientious and methodical . "
* V'era at the same time smiling with a sense of superiority over her good , conscientious husband ,
who all the same understood life wrongly , as according to V'era all men did .
Berg , judging by his wife , thought all women weak and foolish .
V'era , judging only by her husband and generalizing from that observation , supposed that all men , though they understand nothing and are conceited and selfish , ascribe common sense to themselves alone .
* To be a man .
Berg rose and embraced his wife carefully , so as not to crush her lace fichu for which he had paid a good price , kissing her straight on the lips .
" The only thing is , we must n't have children too soon , " he continued , following an unconscious sequence of ideas .
" Yes , " answered V'era , " I do n't at all want that .
We must live for society . "
" Princess Yus'upova wore one exactly like this , " said Berg , pointing to the fichu with a happy and kindly smile .
Just then Count Bez'ukhov was announced .
Husband and wife glanced at one another , both smiling with self - satisfaction , and each mentally claiming the honor of this visit .
" This is what comes of knowing how to make acquaintances , " thought Berg .
" This is what comes of knowing how to conduct oneself . "
" But please do n't interrupt me when I am entertaining the guests , " said V'era , " because I know what interests each of them and what to say to different people . "
Berg smiled again .
" It ca n't be helped : men must sometimes have masculine conversation , " said he .
Pierre disturbed the symmetry by moving a chair for himself , and Berg and V'era immediately began their evening party , interrupting each other in their efforts to entertain their guest .
V'era , having decided in her own mind that Pierre ought to be entertained with conversation about the French embassy , at once began accordingly .
Before long Bor'is , Berg 's old comrade , arrived .
There was a shade of condescension and patronage in his treatment of Berg and V'era .
After Bor'is came a lady with the colonel , then the general himself , then the Rost'ovs , and the party became unquestionably exactly like all other evening parties .
Everything was just as everybody always has it , especially so the general , who admired the apartment , patted Berg on the shoulder , and with parental authority superintended the setting out of the table for boston .
The general sat down by Count Ily'a Rost'ov , who was next to himself the most important guest .
Everything was just as it was everywhere else .
CHAPTER XXI
Pierre , as one of the principal guests , had to sit down to boston with Count Rost'ov , the general , and the colonel .
At the card table he happened to be directly facing Nat'asha , and was struck by a curious change that had come over her since the ball .
She was silent , and not only less pretty than at the ball , but only redeemed from plainness by her look of gentle indifference to everything around .
" What 's the matter with her ? " thought Pierre , glancing at her .
She was sitting by her sister at the tea table , and reluctantly , without looking at him , made some reply to Bor'is who sat down beside her .
" What has happened to her ? " he asked himself with still greater surprise .
Prince Andrew was standing before her , saying something to her with a look of tender solicitude .
She , having raised her head , was looking up at him , flushed and evidently trying to master her rapid breathing .
And the bright glow of some inner fire that had been suppressed was again alight in her .
She was completely transformed and from a plain girl had again become what she had been at the ball .
Prince Andrew went up to Pierre , and the latter noticed a new and youthful expression in his friend 's face .
Pierre changed places several times during the game , sitting now with his back to Nat'asha and now facing her , but during the whole of the six rubbers he watched her and his friend .
" Something very important is happening between them , " thought Pierre , and a feeling that was both joyful and painful agitated him and made him neglect the game .
After six rubbers the general got up , saying that it was no use playing like that , and Pierre was released .
Nat'asha on one side was talking with S'onya and Bor'is , and V'era with a subtle smile was saying something to Prince Andrew .
Pierre went up to his friend and , asking whether they were talking secrets , sat down beside them .
With so intellectual a guest as she considered Prince Andrew to be , she felt that she had to employ her diplomatic tact .
When Pierre went up to them he noticed that V'era was being carried away by her self - satisfied talk , but that Prince Andrew seemed embarrassed , a thing that rarely happened with him .
" What do you think ?
" V'era was saying with an arch smile . "
You are so discerning , Prince , and understand people 's characters so well at a glance .
What do you think of Natalie ?
Could she be constant in her attachments ?
Could she , like other women " ( V'era meant herself ) , " love a man once for all and remain true to him forever ?
That is what I consider true love .
What do you think , Prince ? "
" Yes , that is true , Prince .
And it must be confessed that Natalie is very susceptible .
" This return to the subject of Natalie caused Prince Andrew to knit his brows with discomfort : he was about to rise , but V'era continued with a still more subtle smile :
" I think no one has been more courted than she , " she went on , " but till quite lately she never cared seriously for anyone .
Now you know , Count , " she said to Pierre , " even our dear cousin Bor'is , who , between ourselves , was very far gone in the land of tenderness ... "
( alluding to a map of love much in vogue at that time ) .
Prince Andrew frowned and remained silent .
" You are friendly with Bor'is , are n't you ? " asked V'era .
" Yes , I know him .... "
" I expect he has told you of his childish love for Nat'asha ? "
" Oh , there was childish love ? " suddenly asked Prince Andrew , blushing unexpectedly .
" Yes , you know between cousins intimacy often leads to love .
Le cousinage est un dangereux voisinage .
* Do n't you think so ? "
* " Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood . "
" Well ? " asked Pierre , seeing his friend 's strange animation with surprise , and noticing the glance he turned on Nat'asha as he rose .
" I must ... I must have a talk with you , " said Prince Andrew .
" You know that pair of women 's gloves ? " ( He referred to the Masonic gloves given to a newly initiated Brother to present to the woman he loved . )
" I ...
but no , I will talk to you later on , " and with a strange light in his eyes and restlessness in his movements , Prince Andrew approached Nat'asha and sat down beside her .
Pierre saw how Prince Andrew asked her something and how she flushed as she replied .
But at that moment Berg came to Pierre and began insisting that he should take part in an argument between the general and the colonel on the affairs in Spain .
Berg was satisfied and happy .
The smile of pleasure never left his face .
The party was very successful and quite like other parties he had seen .
They had not yet had a loud conversation among the men and a dispute about something important and clever .
Now the general had begun such a discussion and so Berg drew Pierre to it .
CHAPTER XXII
Next day , having been invited by the count , Prince Andrew dined with the Rost'ovs and spent the rest of the day there .
Everyone in the house realized for whose sake Prince Andrew came , and without concealing it he tried to be with Nat'asha all day .
Not only in the soul of the frightened yet happy and enraptured Nat'asha , but in the whole house , there was a feeling of awe at something important that was bound to happen .
The countess looked with sad and sternly serious eyes at Prince Andrew when he talked to Nat'asha and timidly started some artificial conversation about trifles as soon as he looked her way .
S'onya was afraid to leave Nat'asha and afraid of being in the way when she was with them .
Nat'asha
grew pale , in a panic of expectation , when she remained alone with him for a moment .
Prince Andrew surprised her by his timidity .
She felt that he wanted to say something to her but could not bring himself to do so .
In the evening , when Prince Andrew had left , the countess went up to Nat'asha and whispered : " Well , what ? "
" Mamma !
For heaven 's sake do n't ask me anything now !
One ca n't talk about that , " said Nat'asha .
But all the same that night Nat'asha , now agitated and now frightened , lay a long time in her mother 's bed gazing straight before her .
She told her how he had complimented her , how he told her he was going abroad , asked her where they were going to spend the summer , and then how he had asked her about Bor'is .
" But such a ... such a ... never happened to me before ! " she said .
" Only I feel afraid in his presence .
I am always afraid when I 'm with him .
What does that mean ?
Does it mean that it 's the real thing ?
Yes ?
Mamma , are you asleep ? "
" No , my love ; I am frightened myself , " answered her mother . "
Now go ! "
" All the same I sha n't sleep .
What silliness , to sleep !
Mummy !
Mummy !
such a thing never happened to me before , " she said , surprised and alarmed at the feeling she was aware of in herself . "
And could we ever have thought ! ... "
It seemed to Nat'asha that even at the time she first saw Prince Andrew at Otr'adnoe she had fallen in love with him .
" And it had to happen that he should come specially to Petersburg while we are here .
And it had to happen that we should meet at that ball .
It is fate .
Clearly it is fate that everything led up to this !
Already then , directly I saw him I felt something peculiar . "
" What else did he say to you ?
What are those verses ?
Read them ... " said her mother , thoughtfully , referring to some verses Prince Andrew had written in Nat'asha 's album .
" Mamma , one need not be ashamed of his being a widower ? "
" Do n't , Nat'asha !
Pray to God . '
Marriages are made in heaven , ' " said her mother .
" Darling Mummy , how I love you !
How happy I am ! "
cried Nat'asha , shedding tears of joy and excitement and embracing her mother .
At that very time Prince Andrew was sitting with Pierre and telling him of his love for Nat'asha and his firm resolve to make her his wife .
That day Countess H'el`ene had a reception at her house .
The French ambassador was there , and a foreign prince of the blood who had of late become a frequent visitor of hers , and many brilliant ladies and gentlemen .
Pierre , who had come downstairs , walked through the rooms and struck everyone by his preoccupied , absent - minded , and morose air .
Since the ball he had felt the approach of a fit of nervous depression and had made desperate efforts to combat it .
At the same time the feeling he had noticed between his prot'eg'ee Nat'asha and Prince Andrew accentuated his gloom by the contrast between his own position and his friend 's .
It was Prince Andrew .
" Ah , it 's you ! " said Pierre with a preoccupied , dissatisfied air . "
And I , you see , am hard at it . "
He pointed to his manuscript book with that air of escaping from the ills of life with which unhappy people look at their work .
Prince Andrew , with a beaming , ecstatic expression of renewed life on his face , paused in front of Pierre and , not noticing his sad look , smiled at him with the egotism of joy .
" Well , dear heart , " said he , " I wanted to tell you about it yesterday
and I have come to do so today .
I never experienced anything like it before .
I am in love , my friend ! "
Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sigh and dumped his heavy person down on the sofa beside Prince Andrew .
" With Nat'asha Rost'ova , yes ? " said he .
" Yes , yes !
Who else should it be ?
I should never have believed it , but the feeling is stronger than I.
Yesterday I tormented myself and suffered , but I would not exchange even that torment for anything in the world , I have not lived till now .
At last I live , but I ca n't live without her !
But can she love me ? ...
I am too old for her ....
Why do n't you speak ? "
" I ?
I ?
What did I tell you ? " said Pierre suddenly , rising and beginning to pace up and down the room .
" I always thought it ....
That girl is such a treasure ...
she is a rare girl ....
My dear friend , I entreat you , do n't philosophize , do n't doubt , marry , marry , marry ....
And I am sure there will not be a happier man than you . "
" But what of her ? "
" She loves you . "
" Do n't talk rubbish ... " said Prince Andrew , smiling and looking into Pierre 's eyes .
" She does , I know , " Pierre cried fiercely .
" But do listen , " returned Prince Andrew , holding him by the arm .
" Do you know the condition I am in ?
I must talk about it to someone . "
" Well , go on , go on .
I am very glad , " said Pierre , and his face really changed , his brow became smooth , and he listened gladly to Prince Andrew .
Prince Andrew seemed , and really was , quite a different , quite a new man .
Where was his spleen , his contempt for life , his disillusionment ?
Pierre was the only person to whom he made up his mind to speak openly ; and to him he told all that was in his soul .
" I should not have believed anyone who told me that I was capable of such love , " said Prince Andrew .
" It is not at all the same feeling that I knew in the past .
" Darkness and gloom , " reiterated Pierre : " yes , yes , I understand that . "
" I can not help loving the light , it is not my fault .
And I am very happy !
You understand me ?
I know you are glad for my sake . "
" Yes , yes , " Pierre assented , looking at his friend with a touched and sad expression in his eyes .
The brighter Prince Andrew 's lot appeared to him , the gloomier seemed his own .
CHAPTER XXIII
Prince Andrew needed his father 's consent to his marriage , and to obtain this he started for the country next day .
His father received his son 's communication with external composure , but inward wrath .
He could not comprehend how anyone could wish to alter his life or introduce anything new into it , when his own life was already ending .
" If only they would let me end my days as I want to , " thought the old man , " then they might do as they please . "
With his son , however , he employed the diplomacy he reserved for important occasions and , adopting a quiet tone , discussed the whole matter .
In the first place the marriage was not a brilliant one as regards birth , wealth , or rank .
Secondly , Prince Andrew was no longer as young as he had been and his health was poor ( the old man laid special stress on this ) , while she was very young .
Thirdly , he had a son whom it would be a pity to entrust to a chit of a girl . "
Fourthly and finally , " the father said , looking ironically at his son , " I beg you to put it off for a year :
go abroad , take a cure , look out as you wanted to for a German tutor for Prince Nicholas .
Then if your love or passion or obstinacy - as you please - is still as great , marry !
And that 's my last word on it .
Mind , the last ... " concluded the prince , in a tone which showed that nothing would make him alter his decision .
Three weeks after the last evening he had spent with the Rost'ovs , Prince Andrew returned to Petersburg .
Next day after her talk with her mother Nat'asha expected Bolk'onski all day , but he did not come .
On the second and third day it was the same .
Pierre did not come either and
Nat'asha , not knowing that Prince Andrew had gone to see his father , could not explain his absence to herself .
Three weeks passed in this way .
Nat'asha had no desire to go out anywhere and wandered from room to room like a shadow , idle and listless ; she wept secretly at night and did not go to her mother in the evenings .
She blushed continually and was irritable .
It seemed to her that everybody knew about her disappointment and was laughing at her and pitying her .
Strong as was her inward grief , this wound to her vanity intensified her misery .
Once she came to her mother , tried to say something , and suddenly began to cry .
Her tears were those of an offended child who does not know why it is being punished .
The countess began to soothe Nat'asha , who after first listening to her mother 's words , suddenly interrupted her :
" Leave off , Mamma !
I do n't think , and do n't want to think about it !
He just came and then left off , left off .... "
Her voice trembled , and she again nearly cried , but recovered and went on quietly :
" And I do n't at all want to get married .
And I am afraid of him ; I have now become quite calm , quite calm . "
Having finished her morning tea she went to the ballroom , which she particularly liked for its loud resonance , and began singing her solfeggio .
When she had finished her first exercise she stood still in the middle of the room and sang a musical phrase that particularly pleased her .
She listened joyfully ( as though she had not expected it ) to the charm of the notes reverberating , filling the whole empty ballroom , and slowly dying away ; and all at once she felt cheerful . "
What 's the good of making so much of it ?
( she had on a new and favorite pair of shoes ) and listening to the regular tap of the heel and creak of the toe as gladly as she had to the sounds of her own voice .
Passing a mirror she glanced into it . "
There , that 's me ! "
the expression of her face seemed to say as she caught sight of herself . "
Well , and very nice too !
I need nobody . "
A footman wanted to come in to clear away something in the room
but she would not let him , and having closed the door behind him continued her walk .
That morning she had returned to her favorite mood - love of , and delight in , herself . "
How charming that Nat'asha is ! "
she said again , speaking as some third , collective , male person . "
Pretty , a good voice , young , and in nobody 's way if only they leave her in peace . "
But however much they left her in peace she could not now be at peace , and immediately felt this .
In the hall the porch door opened , and someone asked , " At home ? " and then footsteps were heard .
Nat'asha was looking at the mirror , but did not see herself .
She listened to the sounds in the hall .
When she saw herself , her face was pale .
It was he .
She knew this for certain , though she hardly heard his voice through the closed doors .
Pale and agitated , Nat'asha ran into the drawing room .
" Mamma ! Bolk'onski has come ! "
she said .
" Mamma , it is awful , it is unbearable !
I do n't want ... to be tormented ?
What am I to do ? ... "
Before the countess could answer , Prince Andrew entered the room with an agitated and serious face .
As soon as he saw Nat'asha his face brightened .
He kissed the countess ' hand and Nat'asha 's , and sat down beside the sofa .
" It is long since we had the pleasure ... " began the countess , but Prince Andrew interrupted her by answering her intended question , obviously in haste to say what he had to .
" I have not been to see you all this time because I have been at my father 's .
I had to talk over a very important matter with him .
I only got back last night , " he said glancing at Nat'asha ; " I want to have a talk with you , Countess , " he added after a moment 's pause .
The countess lowered her eyes , sighing deeply .
" I am at your disposal , " she murmured .
Nat'asha knew that she ought to go away , but was unable to do so : something gripped her throat , and regardless of manners she stared straight at Prince Andrew with wide - open eyes .
" At once ?
This instant ! ...
No , it ca n't be ! "
she thought .
Again he glanced at her , and that glance convinced her that she was not mistaken .
Yes , at once , that very instant , her fate would be decided .
" Go , Nat'asha !
I will call you , " said the countess in a whisper .
Nat'asha glanced with frightened imploring eyes at Prince Andrew and at her mother and went out .
" I have come , Countess , to ask for your daughter 's hand , " said Prince Andrew .
The countess ' face flushed hotly , but she said nothing .
" Your offer ... " she began at last sedately .
He remained silent , looking into her eyes . "
Your offer ... "
( she grew confused ) " is agreeable to us , and I accept your offer .
I am glad .
And my husband ...
I hope ... but it will depend on her .... "
" I will speak to her when I have your consent ....
Do you give it to me ? " said Prince Andrew .
" Yes , " replied the countess .
She held out her hand to him , and with a mixed feeling of estrangement and tenderness pressed her lips to his forehead as he stooped to kiss her hand .
She wished to love him as a son , but felt that to her he was a stranger and a terrifying man .
" I am sure my husband will consent , " said the countess , " but your father ... "
" My father , to whom I have told my plans , has made it an express condition of his consent that the wedding is not to take place for a year .
And I wished to tell you of that , " said Prince Andrew .
" It is true that Nat'asha is still young , but - so long as that ? ... "
" It is unavoidable , " said Prince Andrew with a sigh .
" I will send her to you , " said the countess , and left the room .
" Lord have mercy upon us ! " she repeated while seeking her daughter .
S'onya said that Nat'asha was in her bedroom .
Nat'asha was sitting on the bed , pale and dry - eyed , and was gazing at the icons and whispering something as she rapidly crossed herself .
Seeing her mother she jumped up and flew to her .
" Well , Mamma ? ...
Well ? ... "
" Go , go to him .
He is asking for your hand , " said the countess , coldly it seemed to Nat'asha . "
Go ... go , " said the mother , sadly and reproachfully , with a deep sigh , as her daughter ran away .
Nat'asha never remembered how she entered the drawing room .
When she came in and saw him she paused .
" Is it possible that this stranger has now become everything to me ? "
she asked herself , and immediately answered , " Yes , everything !
He alone is now dearer to me than everything in the world . "
Prince Andrew came up to her with downcast eyes .
" I have loved you from the very first moment I saw you .
May I hope ? "
He looked at her and was struck by the serious impassioned expression of her face .
Her face said : " Why ask ?
Why doubt what you can not
but know ?
Why speak , when words can not express what one feels ? "
She drew near to him and stopped .
He took her hand and kissed it .
" Do you love me ? "
" Yes , yes ! "
Nat'asha murmured as if in vexation .
Then she sighed loudly and , catching her breath more and more quickly , began to sob .
" What is it ?
What 's the matter ? "
" Oh , I am so happy ! " she replied , smiled through her tears , bent over closer to him , paused for an instant as if asking herself whether she might , and then kissed him .
Prince Andrew held her hands , looked into her eyes , and did not find in his heart his former love for her .
The present feeling , though not so bright and poetic as the former , was stronger and more serious .
" Did your mother tell you that it can not be for a year ? "
asked Prince Andrew , still looking into her eyes .
Can it be true ?
Can it be true that there can be no more playing with life , that now I am grown up , that on me now lies a responsibility for my every word and deed ?
Yes , but what did he ask me ? "
" No , " she replied , but she had not understood his question .
" Forgive me ! "
he said .
" But you are so young , and I have already been through so much in life .
I am afraid for you , you do not yet know yourself . "
Nat'asha listened with concentrated attention , trying but failing to take in the meaning of his words .
" Hard as this year which delays my happiness will be , " continued Prince Andrew , " it will give you time to be sure of yourself .
" Why do you say that ? "
Nat'asha interrupted him .
" You know that from the very day you first came to Otr'adnoe
I have loved you
, " she cried , quite convinced that she spoke the truth .
" In a year you will learn to know yourself .... "
" A whole year ! "
Nat'asha repeated suddenly , only now realizing that the marriage was to be postponed for a year . "
But why a year ?
Why a year ? ... "
Prince Andrew began to explain to her the reasons for this delay .
Nat'asha did not hear him .
" And ca n't it be helped ? "
she asked .
Prince Andrew did not reply , but his face expressed the impossibility of altering that decision .
" It 's awful !
Oh , it 's awful ! awful ! "
Nat'asha suddenly cried , and again burst into sobs .
" I shall die , waiting a year : it 's impossible , it 's awful ! "
She looked into her lover 's face and saw in it a look of commiseration and perplexity .
" No , no ! I 'll do anything ! "
she said , suddenly checking her tears .
" I am so happy . "
The father and mother came into the room and gave the betrothed couple their blessing .
From that day Prince Andrew began to frequent the Rost'ovs ' as Nat'asha 's affianced lover .
CHAPTER XXIV
No betrothal ceremony took place and Nat'asha 's engagement to Bolk'onski was not announced ; Prince Andrew insisted on that .
If after six months she felt that she did not love him she would have full right to reject him .
Naturally neither Nat'asha nor her parents wished to hear of this , but Prince Andrew was firm .
He came every day to the Rost'ovs ' , but did not behave to Nat'asha as an affianced lover : he did not use the familiar thou , but said you to her , and kissed only her hand .
After their engagement , quite different , intimate , and natural relations sprang up between them .
It was as if they had not known each other till now .
Both liked to recall how they had regarded each other when as yet they were nothing to one another ; they felt themselves now quite different beings : then they were artificial , now natural and sincere .
After a few days they grew accustomed to him , and without restraint in his presence pursued their usual way of life , in which he took his part .
He could talk about rural economy with the count , fashions with the countess and Nat'asha , and about albums and fancywork with S'onya .
Sometimes the household both among themselves and in his presence expressed their wonder at how it had all happened , and at the evident omens there had been of it :
In the house that poetic dullness and quiet reigned which always accompanies the presence of a betrothed couple .
Often when all sitting together everyone kept silent .
Sometimes the others would get up and go away and the couple , left alone , still remained silent .
They rarely spoke of their future life .
Prince Andrew was afraid and ashamed to speak of it .
Nat'asha shared this as she did all his feelings , which she constantly divined .
Once she began questioning him about his son .
Prince Andrew blushed , as he often did now -
Nat'asha particularly liked it in him - and said that his son would not live with them .
" Why not ? " asked Nat'asha in a frightened tone .
" I can not take him away from his grandfather , and besides ... "
" How I should have loved him ! " said Nat'asha , immediately guessing his thought ; " but I know you wish to avoid any pretext for finding fault with us . "
Sometimes the old count would come up , kiss Prince Andrew , and ask his advice about P'etya 's education or Nicholas ' service .
The old countess sighed as she looked at them ; S'onya was always getting frightened lest she should be in the way and tried to find excuses for leaving them alone , even when they did not wish it .
When Prince Andrew spoke ( he could tell a story very well ) , Nat'asha listened to him with pride ; when she spoke she noticed with fear and joy that he gazed attentively and scrutinizingly at her .
She asked herself in perplexity : " What does he look for in me ?
He is trying to discover something by looking at me !
What if what he seeks in me is not there ?
" Sometimes she fell into one of the mad , merry moods characteristic of her , and then she particularly loved to hear and see how Prince Andrew laughed .
He seldom laughed , but when he did he abandoned himself entirely to his laughter , and after such a laugh she always felt nearer to him .
Nat'asha would have been completely happy if the thought of the separation awaiting her and drawing near had not terrified her , just as the mere thought of it made him turn pale and cold .
On the eve of his departure from Petersburg Prince Andrew brought with him Pierre , who had not been to the Rost'ovs ' once since the ball .
Pierre seemed disconcerted and embarrassed .
He was talking to the countess , and Nat'asha sat down beside a little chess table with S'onya , thereby inviting Prince Andrew to come too .
He did so .
" You have known Bez'ukhov a long time ? " he asked .
" Do you like him ? "
" Yes , he 's a dear , but very absurd . "
And as usual when speaking of Pierre , she began to tell anecdotes of his absent - mindedness , some of which had even been invented about him .
" Do you know I have entrusted him with our secret ?
I have known him from childhood .
He has a heart of gold .
I beg you , Natalie , " Prince Andrew said with sudden seriousness-"I am going away and heaven knows what may happen .
You may cease to ...
all right , I know I am not to say that .
Only this , then : whatever may happen to you when I am not here ... "
" What can happen ? "
" Whatever trouble may come , " Prince Andrew continued , " I beg you , Mademoiselle Sophie , whatever may happen , to turn to him alone for advice and help !
He is a most absent - minded and absurd fellow , but he has a heart of gold . "
Neither her father , nor her mother , nor S'onya , nor Prince Andrew himself could have foreseen how the separation from her lover would act on Nat'asha .
Flushed and agitated she went about the house all that day , dry - eyed , occupied with most trivial matters as if not understanding what awaited her .
She did not even cry when , on taking leave , he kissed her hand for the last time . "
Do n't go !
" she said in a tone that made him wonder whether he really ought not to stay and which he remembered long afterwards .
CHAPTER XXV
During that year after his son 's departure , Prince Nicholas Bolk'onski 's health and temper became much worse .
He grew still more irritable , and it was Princess Mary who generally bore the brunt of his frequent fits of unprovoked anger .
He seemed carefully to seek out her tender spots so as to torture her mentally as harshly as possible .
Princess Mary had two passions and consequently two joys - her nephew , little Nicholas , and religion - and these were the favorite subjects of the prince 's attacks and ridicule .
Whatever was spoken of he would bring round to the superstitiousness of old maids , or the petting and spoiling of children .
" You want to make him "- little Nicholas-"into an old maid like yourself !
A pity !
Prince Andrew wants a son and not an old maid , " he would say .
Or , turning to Mademoiselle Bourienne , he would ask her in Princess Mary 's presence how she liked our village priests and icons and would joke about them .
He continually hurt Princess Mary 's feelings and tormented her , but it cost her no effort to forgive him .
Could he be to blame toward her , or could her father , whom she knew loved her in spite of it all , be unjust ?
And what is justice ?
The princess never thought of that proud word " justice . "
All the complex laws of man centered for her in one clear and simple law - the law of love and self - sacrifice taught us by Him who lovingly suffered for mankind though He Himself was God .
What had she to do with the justice or injustice of other people ?
She had to endure and love , and that she did .
During the winter Prince Andrew had come to Bald Hills and had been gay , gentle , and more affectionate than Princess Mary had known him for a long time past .
She felt that something had happened to him , but he said nothing to her about his love .
Before he left he had a long talk with his father about something , and Princess Mary noticed that before his departure they were dissatisfied with one another .
Sorrow , it seems , is our common lot , my dear , tender friend Julie .
Your loss is so terrible that I can only explain it to myself as a special providence of God who , loving you , wishes to try you and your excellent mother .
Oh , my friend !
Religion , and religion alone , can - I will not say comfort us - but save us from despair .
The first death I saw , and one I shall never forget -
that of my dear sister - in - law - left that impression on me .
And what do you think , dear friend ?
Perhaps , I often think , she was too angelically innocent to have the strength to perform all a mother 's duties .
As a young wife she was irreproachable ; perhaps she could not have been so as a mother .
As it is , not only has she left us , and particularly Prince Andrew , with the purest regrets and memories , but probably she will there receive a place I dare not hope for myself .
But not to speak of her alone , that early and terrible death has had the most beneficent influence on me and on my brother in spite of all our grief .
Then , at the moment of our loss , these thoughts could not occur to me ; I should then have dismissed them with horror , but now they are very clear and certain .
And His will is governed only by infinite love for us , and so whatever befalls us is for our good .
You ask whether we shall spend next winter in Moscow .
In spite of my wish to see you , I do not think so and do not want to do so .
You will be surprised to hear that the reason for this is Buonaparte !
The case is this : my father 's health is growing noticeably worse , he can not stand any contradiction and is becoming irritable .
This irritability is , as you know , chiefly directed to political questions .
He can not endure the notion that Buonaparte is negotiating on equal terms with all the sovereigns of Europe and particularly with our own , the grandson of the Great Catherine !
As you know , I am quite indifferent to politics , but from my father 's remarks and his talks with Michael Iv'anovich
And my father can not stand this .
All the benefit he might derive from a course of treatment he would lose as a result of the disputes about Buonaparte which would be inevitable .
In any case it will be decided very shortly .
Our family life goes on in the old way except for my brother Andrew 's absence .
He , as I wrote you before , has changed very much of late .
After his sorrow he only this year quite recovered his spirits .
He has again become as I used to know him when a child : kind , affectionate , with that heart of gold to which I know no equal .
He has realized , it seems to me , that life is not over for him .
But together with this mental change he has grown physically much weaker .
He has become thinner and more nervous .
I am anxious about him and glad he is taking this trip abroad which the doctors recommended long ago .
I hope it will cure him .
You write that in Petersburg he is spoken of as one of the most active , cultivated , and capable of the young men .
Forgive my vanity as a relation , but I never doubted it .
The good he has done to everybody here , from his peasants up to the gentry , is incalculable .
On his arrival in Petersburg he received only his due .
I always wonder at the way rumors fly from Petersburg to Moscow , especially such false ones as that you write about -
I mean the report of my brother 's betrothal to the little Rost'ova .
Secondly because , as far as I know , that girl is not the kind of girl who could please Prince Andrew .
I do not think he would choose her for a wife , and frankly I do not wish it .
But I am running on too long and am at the end of my second sheet .
Good - by , my dear friend .
May God keep you in His holy and mighty care .
My dear friend , Mademoiselle Bourienne , sends you kisses .
MARY
CHAPTER XXVI
In the middle of the summer Princess Mary received an unexpected letter from Prince Andrew in Switzerland in which he gave her strange and surprising news .
He informed her of his engagement to Nat'asha Rost'ova .
The whole letter breathed loving rapture for his betrothed and tender and confiding affection for his sister .
He wrote that he had never loved as he did now and that only now did he understand and know what life was .
He asked his sister to forgive him for not having told her of his resolve when he had last visited Bald Hills , though he had spoken of it to his father .
He had not done so for fear Princess Mary should ask her father to give his consent , irritating him and having to bear the brunt of his displeasure without attaining her object . "
Besides , " he wrote , " the matter was not then so definitely settled as it is now .
My father then insisted on a delay of a year and now already six months , half of that period , have passed , and my resolution is firmer than ever .
If the doctors did not keep me here at the spas I should be back in Russia , but as it is I have to postpone my return for three months .
You know me and my relations with Father .
I want nothing from him .
I have been and always shall be independent ; but to go against his will and arouse his anger , now that he may perhaps remain with us such a short time , would destroy half my happiness .
After long hesitations , doubts , and prayers , Princess Mary gave the letter to her father .
The next day the old prince said to her quietly :
" Write and tell your brother to wait till I am dead ....
It wo n't be long - I shall soon set him free . "
The princess was about to reply , but her father would not let her speak and , raising his voice more and more , cried :
" Marry , marry , my boy ! ...
A good family ! ...
Clever people , eh ?
Rich , eh ?
Yes , a nice stepmother little Nicholas will have !
Write and tell him that he may marry tomorrow if he likes .
She will be little Nicholas ' stepmother and I 'll marry Bourienne ! ...
Ha , ha , ha !
He must n't be without a stepmother either !
Only one thing , no more women are wanted in my house - let him marry and live by himself .
Perhaps you will go and live with him too ? "
he added , turning to Princess Mary . "
Go in heaven 's name !
Go out into the frost ...
the frost ...
the frost ! "
After this outburst the prince did not speak any more about the matter .
But repressed vexation at his son 's poor - spirited behavior found expression in his treatment of his daughter .
To his former pretexts for irony a fresh one was now added - allusions to stepmothers and amiabilities to Mademoiselle Bourienne .
" Why should n't I marry her ? "
he asked his daughter . "
She 'll make a splendid princess ! "
And latterly , to her surprise and bewilderment , Princess Mary noticed that her father was really associating more and more with the Frenchwoman .
She wrote to Prince Andrew about the reception of his letter , but comforted him with hopes of reconciling their father to the idea .
This comforting dream and hope were given her by God 's folk - the half - witted and other pilgrims who visited her without the prince 's knowledge .
Prince Andrew had loved his wife , she died , but that was not enough : he wanted to bind his happiness to another woman .
Her father objected to this because he wanted a more distinguished and wealthier match for Andrew .
And they all struggled and suffered and tormented one another and injured their souls , their eternal souls , for the attainment of benefits which endure but for an instant .
How is it that no one realizes this ? " thought Princess Mary . "
There was one pilgrim , a quiet pockmarked little woman of fifty called Theodosia , who for over thirty years had gone about barefoot and worn heavy chains .
Princess Mary was particularly fond of her .
When Theodosia had gone to sleep Princess Mary thought about this for a long time , and at last made up her mind that , strange as it might seem , she must go on a pilgrimage .
She disclosed this thought to no one but to her confessor , Father Ak'infi , the monk , and he approved of her intention .
Under guise of a present for the pilgrims , Princess Mary prepared a pilgrim 's complete costume for herself : a coarse smock , bast shoes , a rough coat , and a black kerchief .
Often , approaching the chest of drawers containing this secret treasure , Princess Mary paused , uncertain whether the time had not already come to put her project into execution .
" I shall come to a place and pray there , and before having time to get used to it or getting to love it , I shall go farther .
But afterwards , when she saw her father and especially little Koko ( Nicholas ) , her resolve weakened .
She wept quietly , and felt that she was a sinner who loved her father and little nephew more than God .
BOOK SEVEN : 1810 - 11
CHAPTER I
The Bible legend tells us that the absence of labor - idleness - was a condition of the first man 's blessedness before the Fall .
An inner voice tells us we are in the wrong if we are idle .
If man could find a state in which he felt that though idle he was fulfilling his duty , he would have found one of the conditions of man 's primitive blessedness .
And such a state of obligatory and irreproachable idleness is the lot of a whole class - the military .
The chief attraction of military service has consisted and will consist in this compulsory and irreproachable idleness .
Nicholas Rost'ov experienced this blissful condition to the full when , after 1807 , he continued to serve in the P'avlograd regiment , in which he already commanded the squadron he had taken over from Den'isov .
Reading these letters , Nicholas felt a dread of their wanting to take him away from surroundings in which , protected from all the entanglements of life , he was living so calmly and quietly .
In 1810 he received letters from his parents , in which they told him of Nat'asha 's engagement to Bolk'onski , and that the wedding would be in a year 's time because the old prince made difficulties .
This letter grieved and mortified Nicholas .
But in the spring of that year , he received a letter from his mother , written without his father 's knowledge , and that letter persuaded him to return .
She wrote that if he did not come and take matters in hand , their whole property would be sold by auction and they would all have to go begging .
The count was so weak , and trusted M'itenka so much , and was so good - natured , that everybody took advantage of him and things were going from bad to worse . "
For God 's sake , I implore you , come at once if you do not wish to make me and the whole family wretched , " wrote the countess .
This letter touched Nicholas .
He had that common sense of a matter - of - fact man which showed him what he ought to do .
The right thing now was , if not to retire from the service , at any rate to go home on leave .
A week later he obtained his leave .
Rost'ov danced the Trep'ak with Major B'asov ; the tipsy officers tossed , embraced , and dropped Rost'ov ; the soldiers of the third squadron tossed him too , and shouted " hurrah ! "
and then they put him in his sleigh and escorted him as far as the first post station .
At the last post station before Otr'adnoe he gave the driver a three - ruble tip , and on arriving he ran breathlessly , like a boy , up the steps of his home .
After the rapture of meeting , and after that odd feeling of unsatisfied expectation - the feeling that " everything is just the same , so why did I hurry ?"-
Nicholas began to settle down in his old home world .
His father and mother were much the same , only a little older .
What was new in them was a certain uneasiness and occasional discord , which there used not to be , and which , as Nicholas soon found out , was due to the bad state of their affairs .
S'onya was nearly twenty ; she had stopped growing prettier and promised nothing more than she was already , but that was enough .
She exhaled happiness and love from the time Nicholas returned , and the faithful , unalterable love of this girl had a gladdening effect on him .
P'etya and Nat'asha surprised Nicholas most .
P'etya was a big handsome boy of thirteen , merry , witty , and mischievous , with a voice that was already breaking .
As for Nat'asha , for a long while Nicholas wondered and laughed whenever he looked at her .
" You 're not the same at all , " he said .
" How ?
Am I uglier ? "
" On the contrary , but what dignity ?
A princess ! "
he whispered to her .
" Yes , yes , yes ! " cried Nat'asha , joyfully .
She told him about her romance with Prince Andrew and of his visit to Otr'adnoe and showed him his last letter .
" Well , are you glad ? "
Nat'asha asked .
" I am so tranquil and happy now . "
" Very glad , " answered Nicholas .
" He is an excellent fellow ....
And are you very much in love ? "
" How shall I put it ? " replied Nat'asha .
" I was in love with Bor'is , with my teacher , and with Den'isov , but this is quite different .
I feel at peace and settled .
I know that no better man than he exists , and I am calm and contented now .
Not at all as before . "
" You do n't at all understand , " she said .
Nicholas was silent and agreed with her .
Her brother often wondered as he looked at her .
She did not seem at all like a girl in love and parted from her affianced husband .
She was even - tempered and calm and quite as cheerful as of old .
This amazed Nicholas and even made him regard Bolk'onski 's courtship skeptically .
He could not believe that her fate was sealed , especially as he had not seen her with Prince Andrew .
It always seemed to him that there was something not quite right about this intended marriage .
" Why this delay ?
Why no betrothal ? " he thought .
Once , when he had touched on this topic with his mother , he discovered , to his surprise and somewhat to his satisfaction , that in the depth of her soul she too had doubts about this marriage .
What can be keeping him ?
Illness , probably !
His health is very delicate .
Do n't tell Nat'asha .
However , God grant that everything turns out well ! "
( She always ended with these words . )
" He is an excellent man ! "
CHAPTER II
After reaching home Nicholas was at first serious and even dull .
He was worried by the impending necessity of interfering in the stupid business matters for which his mother had called him home .
But what an account of everything might be Nicholas knew even less than the frightened and bewildered M'itenka .
The conversation and the examination of the accounts with M'itenka did not last long .
" Robber ! ...
Ungrateful wretch ! ...
I 'll hack the dog to pieces !
I 'm not my father ! ...
Robbing us ! ... " and so on .
Never let me see your face here again , you villain ! "
M'itenka flew headlong down the six steps and ran away into the shrubbery .
( This shrubbery was a well - known haven of refuge for culprits at Otr'adnoe .
M'itenka himself , returning tipsy from the town , used to hide there , and many of the residents at Otr'adnoe , hiding from M'itenka , knew of its protective qualities . )
The young count paid no heed to them , but , breathing hard , passed by with resolute strides and went into the house .
She went several times to his door on tiptoe and listened , as he lighted one pipe after another .
Next day the old count called his son aside and , with an embarrassed smile , said to him :
" But you know , my dear boy , it 's a pity you got excited !
M'itenka has told me all about it . "
" I knew , " thought Nicholas , " that I should never understand anything in this crazy world . "
" You were angry that he had not entered those 700 rubles .
But they were carried forward - and you did not look at the other page . "
" Papa , he is a blackguard and a thief !
I know he is !
And what I have done , I have done ;
but , if you like , I wo n't speak to him again . "
" No , my dear boy " ( the count , too , felt embarrassed .
He knew he had mismanaged his wife 's property and was to blame toward his children , but he did not know how to remedy it ) . "
No , I beg you to attend to the business .
I am old .
I ... "
" No , Papa .
Forgive me if I have caused you unpleasantness .
I understand it all less than you do . "
" Devil take all these peasants , and money matters , and carryings forward from page to page , " he thought .
But once the countess called her son and informed him that she had a promissory note from Anna Mikh'aylovna for two thousand rubles , and asked him what he thought of doing with it .
" This , " answered Nicholas .
" You say it rests with me .
Well , I do n't like Anna Mikh'aylovna
and I do n't like Bor'is , but they were our friends and poor .
Well then , this ! "
and he tore up the note , and by so doing caused the old countess to weep tears of joy .
CHAPTER III
The weather was already growing wintry and morning frosts congealed an earth saturated by autumn rains .
The verdure had thickened and its bright green stood out sharply against the brownish strips of winter rye trodden down by the cattle , and against the pale - yellow stubble of the spring buckwheat .
The wooded ravines and the copses , which at the end of August had still been green islands amid black fields and stubble , had become golden and bright - red islands amid the green winter rye .
The hares had already half changed their summer coats , the fox cubs were beginning to scatter , and the young wolves were bigger than dogs .
It was the best time of the year for the chase .
All that day the hounds remained at home .
It was frosty and the air was sharp , but toward evening the sky became overcast and it began to thaw .
The only motion in the air was that of the dripping , microscopic particles of drizzling mist .
The bare twigs in the garden were hung with transparent drops which fell on the freshly fallen leaves .
The earth in the kitchen garden looked wet and black and glistened like poppy seed and at a short distance merged into the dull , moist veil of mist .
Nicholas went out into the wet and muddy porch .
There was a smell of decaying leaves and of dog .
Another borzoi , a dog , catching sight of his master from the garden path , arched his back and , rushing headlong toward the porch with lifted tail , began rubbing himself against his legs .
He doffed his Circassian cap to his master and looked at him scornfully .
This scorn was not offensive to his master .
Nicholas knew that this Daniel , disdainful of everybody and who considered himself above them , was all the same his serf and huntsman .
" Daniel ! "
" Can you resist it ? "
those eyes seemed to be asking .
" It 's a good day , eh ?
For a hunt and a gallop , eh ? " asked Nicholas , scratching M'ilka behind the ears .
Daniel did not answer , but winked instead .
" I sent Uv'arka at dawn to listen , " his bass boomed out after a minute 's pause . "
He says she 's moved them into the Otr'adnoe enclosure .
They were howling there . "
( This meant that the she - wolf , about whom they both knew , had moved with her cubs to the Otr'adnoe copse , a small place a mile and a half from the house . )
" We ought to go , do n't you think so ? " said Nicholas .
" Come to me with Uv'arka . "
" As you please . "
" Then put off feeding them . "
" Yes , sir . "
Five minutes later Daniel and Uv'arka were standing in Nicholas ' big study .
Though Daniel was not a big man , to see him in a room was like seeing a horse or a bear on the floor among the furniture and surroundings of human life .
Having finished his inquiries and extorted from Daniel an opinion that the hounds were fit ( Daniel himself wished to go hunting ) , Nicholas ordered the horses to be saddled .
But just as Daniel was about to go Nat'asha came in with rapid steps , not having done up her hair or finished dressing and with her old nurse 's big shawl wrapped round her .
P'etya ran in at the same time .
" You are going ? " asked Nat'asha .
" I knew you would !
S'onya said you would n't go , but I knew that today is the sort of day when you could n't help going . "
" Yes , we are going , " replied Nicholas reluctantly , for today , as he intended to hunt seriously , he did not want to take Nat'asha and P'etya .
" We are going , but only wolf hunting : it would be dull for you . "
" You know it is my greatest pleasure , " said Nat'asha .
" It 's not fair ; you are going by yourself , are having the horses saddled and said nothing to us about it . "
" ' No barrier bars a Russian 's path'-we'll go ! " shouted P'etya .
" But you ca n't .
Mamma said you must n't , " said Nicholas to Nat'asha .
" Yes , I 'll go .
I shall certainly go , " said Nat'asha decisively . "
Daniel , tell them to saddle for us , and Michael must come with my dogs , " she added to the huntsman .
It seemed to Daniel irksome and improper to be in a room at all , but to have anything to do with a young lady seemed to him impossible .
He cast down his eyes and hurried out as if it were none of his business , careful as he went not to inflict any accidental injury on the young lady .
CHAPTER IV
In an hour 's time the whole hunting party was at the porch .
Nicholas , with a stern and serious air which showed that now was no time for attending to trifles , went past Nat'asha and P'etya who were trying to tell him something .
They were taking fifty - four hounds , with six hunt attendants and whippers - in .
Each dog knew its master and its call .
Each man in the hunt knew his business , his place , what he had to do .
As soon as they had passed the fence they all spread out evenly and quietly , without noise or talk , along the road and field leading to the Otr'adnoe covert .
The horses stepped over the field as over a thick carpet , now and then splashing into puddles as they crossed a road .
The misty sky still seemed to descend evenly and imperceptibly toward the earth , the air was still , warm , and silent .
Occasionally the whistle of a huntsman , the snort of a horse , the crack of a whip , or the whine of a straggling hound could be heard .
When they had gone a little less than a mile , five more riders with dogs appeared out of the mist , approaching the Rost'ovs .
In front rode a fresh - looking , handsome old man with a large gray mustache .
" Good morning , Uncle ! " said Nicholas , when the old man drew near .
" That 's it .
Come on ! ...
I was sure of it , " began " Uncle . "
( He was a distant relative of the Rost'ovs ' , a man of small means , and their neighbor . )
" I knew you would n't be able to resist it and it 's a good thing you 're going .
That 's it !
Come on ! "
( This was " Uncle 's " favorite expression . )
" Take the covert at once , for my G'irchik says the Il'agins are at Kornik'i with their hounds .
That 's it .
Come on ! ...
They 'll take the cubs from under your very nose . "
" That 's where I 'm going .
Shall we join up our packs ? " asked Nicholas .
The hounds were joined into one pack , and " Uncle " and Nicholas rode on side by side .
Nat'asha , muffled up in shawls which did not hide her eager face and shining eyes , galloped up to them .
She was followed by P'etya who always kept close to her , by Michael , a huntsman , and by a groom appointed to look after her .
P'etya , who was laughing , whipped and pulled at his horse .
Nat'asha sat easily and confidently on her black Ar'abchik and reined him in without effort with a firm hand .
" Uncle " looked round disapprovingly at P'etya and Nat'asha .
He did not like to combine frivolity with the serious business of hunting .
" Good morning , Uncle !
We are going too ! " shouted P'etya .
" Good morning , good morning !
But do n't go overriding the hounds , " said " Uncle " sternly .
" Nicholas , what a fine dog Trun'ila is !
He knew me , " said Nat'asha , referring to her favorite hound .
Nat'asha understood it .
" You must n't think we 'll be in anyone 's way , Uncle , " she said .
" We 'll go to our places and wo n't budge . "
The oasis of the Otr'adnoe covert came in sight a few hundred yards off , the huntsmen were already nearing it .
" Well , nephew , you 're going for a big wolf , " said " Uncle . "
" Mind and do n't let her slip ! "
" That 's as may happen , " answered Rost'ov .
" Kar'ay , here !
" he shouted , answering " Uncle 's " remark by this call to his borzoi .
Kar'ay was a shaggy old dog with a hanging jowl , famous for having tackled a big wolf unaided .
They all took up their places .
Having straightened his coat and fastened on his hunting knives and horn , he mounted his good , sleek , well - fed , and comfortable horse , Vifly'anka , which was turning gray , like himself .
His horses and trap were sent home .
Beside him was Simon Chekm'ar , his personal attendant , an old horseman now somewhat stiff in the saddle .
Chekm'ar held in leash three formidable wolfhounds , who had , however , grown fat like their master and his horse .
Two wise old dogs lay down unleashed .
Some hundred paces farther along the edge of the wood stood M'itka , the count 's other groom , a daring horseman and keen rider to hounds .
Before the hunt , by old custom , the count had drunk a silver cupful of mulled brandy , taken a snack , and washed it down with half a bottle of his favorite Bordeaux .
He was somewhat flushed with the wine and the drive .
His eyes were rather moist and glittered more than usual , and as he sat in his saddle , wrapped up in his fur coat , he looked like a child taken out for an outing .
A third person rode up circumspectly through the wood ( it was plain that he had had a lesson ) and stopped behind the count .
This person was a gray - bearded old man in a woman 's cloak , with a tall peaked cap on his head .
He was the buffoon , who went by a woman 's name , Nast'asya Iv'anovna .
" Well , Nast'asya Iv'anovna ! "
whispered the count , winking at him .
" If you scare away the beast , Daniel'll give it you ! "
" I know a thing or two myself ! " said Nast'asya Iv'anovna .
" Hush ! " whispered the count and turned to Simon . "
Have you seen the young countess ?
" he asked .
" Where is she ? "
" With young Count Peter , by the Zh'arov rank grass , " answered Simon , smiling . "
Though she 's a lady , she 's very fond of hunting . "
" And you 're surprised at the way she rides , Simon , eh ? " said the count .
" She 's as good as many a man ! "
" Of course !
It 's marvelous .
So bold , so easy ! "
" And Nicholas ?
Where is he ?
By the Ly'adov upland , is n't he ? "
" Yes , sir .
He knows where to stand .
He understands the matter so well that Daniel and I are often quite astounded , " said Simon , well knowing what would please his master .
" Rides well , eh ?
And how well he looks on his horse , eh ? "
" A perfect picture !
How he chased a fox out of the rank grass by the Zav'arzinsk thicket the other day !
Leaped a fearful place ; what a sight when they rushed from the covert ... the horse worth a thousand rubles and the rider beyond all price !
Yes , one would have to search far to find another as smart . "
" To search far ... " repeated the count , evidently sorry Simon had not said more . "
To search far , " he said , turning back the skirt of his coat to get at his snuffbox .
He bent down his head and listened , shaking a warning finger at his master . "
They are on the scent of the cubs ...
" he whispered , " straight to the Ly'adov uplands . "
The count , forgetting to smooth out the smile on his face , looked into the distance straight before him , down the narrow open space , holding the snuffbox in his hand but not taking any .
The whippers - in no longer set on the hounds , but changed to the cry of ulyulyu , and above the others rose Daniel 's voice , now a deep bass , now piercingly shrill .
His voice seemed to fill the whole wood and carried far beyond out into the open field .
The sounds of both packs mingled and broke apart again , but both were becoming more distant .
Simon sighed and stooped to straighten the leash a young borzoi had entangled ; the count too sighed and , noticing the snuffbox in his hand , opened it and took a pinch . "
Back ! "
cried Simon to a borzoi that was pushing forward out of the wood .
The count started and dropped the snuffbox .
Nast'asya Iv'anovna dismounted to pick it up .
The count and Simon were looking at him .
Then , unexpectedly , as often happens , the sound of the hunt suddenly approached , as if the hounds in full cry and Daniel ulyulyuing were just in front of them .
The count turned and saw on his right M'itka staring at him with eyes starting out of his head , raising his cap and pointing before him to the other side .
" Look out ! "
he shouted , in a voice plainly showing that he had long fretted to utter that word , and letting the borzois slip he galloped toward the count .
The angry borzois whined and getting free of the leash rushed past the horses ' feet at the wolf .
The hazel bushes parted behind the hounds and Daniel 's chestnut horse appeared , dark with sweat .
On its long back sat Daniel , hunched forward , capless , his disheveled gray hair hanging over his flushed , perspiring face .
" Ulyulyulyu ! ulyulyu ! ...
" he cried .
When he caught sight of the count his eyes flashed lightning .
" Blast you ! " he shouted , holding up his whip threateningly at the count .
" You 've let the wolf go ! ...
What sportsmen ! "
and as if scorning to say more to the frightened and shamefaced count , he lashed the heaving flanks of his sweating chestnut gelding with all the anger the count had aroused and flew off after the hounds .
The count , like a punished schoolboy , looked round , trying by a smile to win Simon 's sympathy for his plight .
But Simon was no longer there .
He was galloping round by the bushes while the field was coming up on both sides , all trying to head the wolf , but it vanished into the wood before they could do so .
CHAPTER V
Nicholas Rost'ov meanwhile remained at his post , waiting for the wolf .
He knew that young and old wolves were there , that the hounds had separated into two packs , that somewhere a wolf was being chased , and that something had gone wrong .
He expected the wolf to come his way any moment .
He made thousands of different conjectures as to where and from what side the beast would come and how he would set upon it .
Hope alternated with despair .
Several times he addressed a prayer to God that the wolf should come his way .
He prayed with that passionate and shamefaced feeling with which men pray at moments of great excitement arising from trivial causes .
" What would it be to Thee to do this for me ? "
he said to God .
" No , I sha n't have such luck , " thought Rost'ov , " yet what would n't it be worth !
It is not to be !
Everywhere , at cards and in war , I am always unlucky . "
Memories of Austerlitz and of D'olokhov flashed rapidly and clearly through his mind .
Again he looked to the right and saw something running toward him across the deserted field . "
No , it ca n't be ! "
thought Rost'ov , taking a deep breath , as a man does at the coming of something long hoped for .
The height of happiness was reached - and so simply , without warning , or noise , or display , that Rost'ov could not believe his eyes and remained in doubt for over a second .
The wolf ran forward and jumped heavily over a gully that lay in her path .
She was an old animal with a gray back and big reddish belly .
She ran without hurry , evidently feeling sure that no one saw her .
Rost'ov , holding his breath , looked round at the borzois .
They stood or lay not seeing the wolf or understanding the situation .
Old Kar'ay had turned his head and was angrily searching for fleas , baring his yellow teeth and snapping at his hind legs .
" Ulyulyulyu ! " whispered Rost'ov , pouting his lips .
The borzois jumped up , jerking the rings of the leashes and pricking their ears .
Kar'ay finished scratching his hindquarters and , cocking his ears , got up with quivering tail from which tufts of matted hair hung down .
" Shall I loose them or not ? "
Nicholas asked himself as the wolf approached him coming from the copse .
Suddenly the wolf 's whole physiognomy changed : she shuddered , seeing what she had probably never seen before - human eyes fixed upon her - and turning her head a little toward Rost'ov , she paused .
" Back or forward ?
Eh , no matter , forward ... " the wolf seemed to say to herself , and she moved forward without again looking round and with a quiet , long , easy yet resolute lope .
The first to come into view was M'ilka , with her black markings and powerful quarters , gaining upon the wolf .
Nearer and nearer ...
now she was ahead of it ; but the wolf turned its head to face her , and instead of putting on speed as she usually did M'ilka suddenly raised her tail and stiffened her forelegs .
" Ulyulyulyulyu ! " shouted Nicholas .
The reddish Lyub'im rushed forward from behind M'ilka , sprang impetuously at the wolf , and seized it by its hindquarters , but immediately jumped aside in terror .
The wolf crouched , gnashed her teeth , and again rose and bounded forward , followed at the distance of a couple of feet by all the borzois , who did not get any closer to her .
" She 'll get away !
No , it 's impossible ! "
thought Nicholas , still shouting with a hoarse voice .
" Kar'ay , ulyulyu ! ...
" he shouted , looking round for the old borzoi who was now his only hope .
Kar'ay , with all the strength age had left him , stretched himself to the utmost and , watching the wolf , galloped heavily aside to intercept it .
But the quickness of the wolf 's lope and the borzoi 's slower pace made it plain that Kar'ay had miscalculated .
Nicholas could already see not far in front of him the wood where the wolf would certainly escape
should she reach it .
But , coming toward him , he saw hounds and a huntsman galloping almost straight at the wolf .
There was still hope .
A long , yellowish young borzoi , one Nicholas did not know , from another leash , rushed impetuously at the wolf from in front and almost knocked her over .
" Kar'ay ?
Old fellow ! ... " wailed Nicholas .
Thanks to the delay caused by this crossing of the wolf 's path , the old dog with its felted hair hanging from its thigh was within five paces of it .
As if aware of her danger , the wolf turned her eyes on Kar'ay , tucked her tail yet further between her legs , and increased her speed .
But here Nicholas only saw that something happened to Kar'ay - the borzoi was suddenly on the wolf , and they rolled together down into a gully just in front of them .
( Kar'ay was pinning her by the throat ) , was the happiest moment of his life .
She clicked her teeth (
Kar'ay no longer had her by the throat ) , leaped with a movement of her hind legs out of the gully , and having disengaged herself from the dogs , with tail tucked in again , went forward .
Kar'ay , his hair bristling , and probably bruised or wounded , climbed with difficulty out of the gully .
" Oh my God !
Why ? "
Nicholas cried in despair .
" Uncle 's " huntsman was galloping from the other side across the wolf 's path and his borzois once more stopped the animal 's advance .
She was again hemmed in .
Already , at the beginning of this chase , Daniel , hearing the ulyulyuing , had rushed out from the wood .
He saw Kar'ay seize the wolf , and checked his horse , supposing the affair to be over .
As a result of this , he galloped up to the wolf just when she had been stopped a second time by " Uncle 's " borzois .
Daniel galloped up silently , holding a naked dagger in his left hand and thrashing the laboring sides of his chestnut horse with his whip as if it were a flail .
It was evident to the dogs , the hunters , and to the wolf herself that all was now over .
The terrified wolf pressed back her ears and tried to rise , but the borzois stuck to her .
Daniel rose a little , took a step , and with his whole weight , as if lying down to rest , fell on the wolf , seizing her by the ears .
Nicholas was about to stab her , but Daniel whispered , " Do n't !
We 'll gag her ! "
and , changing his position , set his foot on the wolf 's neck .
A stick was thrust between her jaws and she was fastened with a leash , as if bridled , her legs were bound together , and Daniel rolled her over once or twice from side to side .
The hounds had killed two of the cubs and the borzois three .
When she was touched , she jerked her bound legs and looked wildly yet simply at everybody .
Old Count Rost'ov also rode up and touched the wolf .
" Oh , what a formidable one ! " said he .
" A formidable one , eh ?
" he asked Daniel , who was standing near .
" Yes , your excellency , " answered Daniel , quickly doffing his cap .
The count remembered the wolf he had let slip and his encounter with Daniel .
" Ah , but you are a crusty fellow , friend ! " said the count .
For sole reply Daniel gave him a shy , childlike , meek , and amiable smile .
CHAPTER VI
The old count went home , and Nat'asha and P'etya promised to return very soon , but as it was still early the hunt went farther .
At midday they put the hounds into a ravine thickly overgrown with young trees .
Nicholas standing in a fallow field could see all his whips .
Facing him lay a field of winter rye , there his own huntsman stood alone in a hollow behind a hazel bush .
The hounds had scarcely been loosed before Nicholas heard one he knew , Volt'orn , giving tongue at intervals ; other hounds joined in , now pausing and now again giving tongue .
A moment later he heard a cry from the wooded ravine that a fox had been found , and the whole pack , joining together , rushed along the ravine toward the ryefield and away from Nicholas .
He saw the whips in their red caps galloping along the edge of the ravine , he even saw the hounds , and was expecting a fox to show itself at any moment on the ryefield opposite .
The huntsman standing in the hollow moved and loosed his borzois , and Nicholas saw a queer , short - legged red fox with a fine brush going hard across the field .
The borzois bore down on it ....
Two huntsmen galloped up to the dogs ; one in a red cap , the other , a stranger , in a green coat .
" What 's this ? " thought Nicholas .
" Where 's that huntsman from ?
He is not ' Uncle 's ' man . "
The huntsmen got the fox , but stayed there a long time without strapping it to the saddle .
Their horses , bridled and with high saddles , stood near them and there too the dogs were lying .
The huntsmen waved their arms and did something to the fox .
Then from that spot came the sound of a horn , with the signal agreed on in case of a fight .
" That 's Il'agin 's huntsman having a row with our Iv'an , " said Nicholas ' groom .
Nicholas sent the man to call Nat'asha and P'etya to him , and rode at a footpace to the place where the whips were getting the hounds together .
Several of the field galloped to the spot where the fight was going on .
Nicholas dismounted , and with Nat'asha and P'etya , who had ridden up , stopped near the hounds , waiting to see how the matter would end .
Out of the bushes came the huntsman who had been fighting and rode toward his young master , with the fox tied to his crupper .
While still at a distance he took off his cap and tried to speak respectfully , but he was pale and breathless and his face was angry .
One of his eyes was black , but he probably was not even aware of it .
" What has happened ? " asked Nicholas .
" A likely thing , killing a fox our dogs had hunted !
And it was my gray bitch that caught it !
Go to law , indeed ! ...
He snatches at the fox !
I gave him one with the fox .
Here it is on my saddle !
Do you want a taste of this ? ... " said the huntsman , pointing to his dagger and probably imagining himself still speaking to his foe .
Nicholas , not stopping to talk to the man , asked his sister and P'etya to wait for him and rode to the spot where the enemy 's , Il'agin 's , hunting party was .
The victorious huntsman rode off to join the field , and there , surrounded by inquiring sympathizers , recounted his exploits .
Nicholas , though he had never seen Il'agin , with his usual absence of moderation in judgment , hated him cordially from reports of his arbitrariness and violence , and regarded him as his bitterest foe .
He rode in angry agitation toward him , firmly grasping his whip and fully prepared to take the most resolute and desperate steps to punish his enemy .
Hardly had he passed an angle of the wood before a stout gentleman in a beaver cap came riding toward him on a handsome raven - black horse , accompanied by two hunt servants .
Instead of an enemy , Nicholas found in Il'agin a stately and courteous gentleman who was particularly anxious to make the young count 's acquaintance .
Having ridden up to Nicholas , Il'agin raised his beaver cap and said he much regretted what had occurred and would have the man punished who had allowed himself to seize a fox hunted by someone else 's borzois .
He hoped to become better acquainted with the count and invited him to draw his covert .
Nat'asha , afraid that her brother would do something dreadful , had followed him in some excitement .
Seeing the enemies exchanging friendly greetings , she rode up to them .
To expiate his huntsman 's offense , Il'agin pressed the Rost'ovs to come to an upland of his about a mile away which he usually kept for himself and which , he said , swarmed with hares .
Nicholas agreed , and the hunt , now doubled , moved on .
The way to Iligin 's upland was across the fields .
The hunt servants fell into line .
The masters rode together . "
Uncle , " Rost'ov , and Il'agin kept stealthily glancing at one another 's dogs , trying not to be observed by their companions and searching uneasily for rivals to their own borzois .
Rost'ov was particularly struck by the beauty of a small , pure - bred , red - spotted bitch on Il'agin 's leash , slender but with muscles like steel , a delicate muzzle , and prominent black eyes .
He had heard of the swiftness of Il'agin 's borzois , and in that beautiful bitch saw a rival to his own M'ilka .
In the middle of a sober conversation begun by Il'agin about the year 's harvest , Nicholas pointed to the red - spotted bitch .
" A fine little bitch , that ! " said he in a careless tone .
" Is she swift ? "
" That one ?
" So in your parts , too , the harvest is nothing to boast of , Count ? "
he went on , continuing the conversation they had begun .
And considering it polite to return the young count 's compliment , Il'agin looked at his borzois and picked out M'ilka who attracted his attention by her breadth .
" That black - spotted one of yours is fine - well shaped ! " said he .
" I do n't understand , " continued Il'agin , " how some sportsmen can be so jealous about game and dogs .
For myself , I can tell you , Count , I enjoy riding in company such as this ... what could be better ? "
( he again raised his cap to Nat'asha ) " but as for counting skins and what one takes , I do n't care about that . "
" Of course not ! "
" Or being upset because someone else 's borzoi and not mine catches something .
All I care about is to enjoy seeing the chase , is it not so , Count ?
For I consider that ... "
" A - tu ! " came the long - drawn cry of one of the borzoi whippers - in , who had halted .
He stood on a knoll in the stubble , holding his whip aloft , and again repeated his long - drawn cry , " A - tu ! "
( This call and the uplifted whip meant that he saw a sitting hare . )
" Ah , he has found one , I think , " said Il'agin carelessly .
" Yes , we must ride up ....
Shall we both course it ?
" answered Nicholas , seeing in Erz'a and " Uncle 's " red Rug'ay two rivals he had never yet had a chance of pitting against his own borzois . "
And suppose they outdo my M'ilka at once ! "
he thought as he rode with " Uncle " and Il'agin toward the hare .
" A full - grown one ? " asked Il'agin as he approached the whip who had sighted the hare - and not without agitation he looked round and whistled to Erz'a .
" And you , Michael Nikan'orovich ?
" he said , addressing " Uncle . "
The latter was riding with a sullen expression on his face .
" How can I join in ?
Why , you 've given a village for each of your borzois !
That 's it , come on !
Yours are worth thousands .
Try yours against one another , you two , and I 'll look on ! "
" Rug'ay , hey , hey ! " he shouted . "
Rug'ayushka ! "
he added , involuntarily by this diminutive expressing his affection and the hopes he placed on this red borzoi .
Nat'asha saw and felt the agitation the two elderly men and her brother were trying to conceal , and was herself excited by it .
All were moving slowly and sedately .
" How is it pointing ? " asked Nicholas , riding a hundred paces toward the whip who had sighted the hare .
But before the whip could reply , the hare , scenting the frost coming next morning , was unable to rest and leaped up .
The pack on leash rushed downhill in full cry after the hare , and from all sides the borzois that were not on leash darted after the hounds and the hare .
The hare they had started was a strong and swift one .
When he jumped up he did not run at once , but pricked his ears listening to the shouting and trampling that resounded from all sides at once .
He took a dozen bounds , not very quickly , letting the borzois gain on him , and , finally having chosen his direction and realized his danger , laid back his ears and rushed off headlong .
He had been lying in the stubble , but in front of him was the autumn sowing where the ground was soft .
The hare arched his back and bounded off yet more swiftly .
From behind Erz'a rushed the broad - haunched , black - spotted M'ilka and began rapidly gaining on the hare .
" Mil'ashka , dear ! " rose Nicholas ' triumphant cry .
It looked as if M'ilka would immediately pounce on the hare , but she overtook him and flew past .
The hare had squatted .
Again the beautiful Erz'a reached him , but when close to the hare 's scut paused as if measuring the distance , so as not to make a mistake this time but seize his hind leg .
" Erz'a , darling ! "
Il'agin wailed in a voice unlike his own .
Erz'a did not hearken to his appeal .
At the very moment when she would have seized her prey , the hare moved and darted along the balk between the winter rye and the stubble .
" Rug'ay , Rug'ayushka !
That 's it , come on ! "
A ring of borzois surrounded him .
A moment later everyone had drawn up round the crowd of dogs .
Only the delighted " Uncle " dismounted , and cut off a pad , shaking the hare for the blood to drip off , and anxiously glancing round with restless eyes while his arms and legs twitched .
He spoke without himself knowing whom to or what about . "
That 's it , come on !
That 's a dog ! ...
There , it has beaten them all , the thousand - ruble as well as the one - ruble borzois .
That 's it , come on ! "
said he , panting and looking wrathfully around as if he were abusing someone , as if they were all his enemies and had insulted him , and only now had he at last succeeded in justifying himself .
" There are your thousand - ruble ones ....
That 's it , come on ! ... "
" Rug'ay , here 's a pad for you ! " he said , throwing down the hare 's muddy pad .
" You 've deserved it , that 's it , come on ! "
" She 'd tired herself out , she 'd run it down three times by herself , " said Nicholas , also not listening to anyone and regardless of whether he were heard or not .
" But what is there in running across it like that ? " said Il'agin 's groom .
" Once she had missed it and turned it away , any mongrel could take it , " Il'agin was saying at the same time , breathless from his gallop and his excitement .
At the same moment Nat'asha , without drawing breath , screamed joyously , ecstatically , and so piercingly that it set everyone 's ear tingling .
The others all followed , dispirited and shamefaced , and only much later were they able to regain their former affectation of indifference .
" Well , I am like any other dog as long as it 's not a question of coursing .
But when it is , then look out !
" his appearance seemed to Nicholas to be saying .
When , much later , " Uncle " rode up to Nicholas and began talking to him , he felt flattered that , after what had happened , " Uncle " deigned to speak to him .
CHAPTER VII
Toward evening Il'agin took leave of Nicholas , who found that they were so far from home that he accepted " Uncle 's " offer that the hunting party should spend the night in his little village of Mikh'aylovna .
" And if you put up at my house that will be better still .
That 's it , come on ! "
said " Uncle . "
" You see it 's damp weather , and you could rest , and the little countess could be driven home in a trap . "
" Uncle 's " offer was accepted .
A huntsman was sent to Otr'adnoe for a trap , while Nicholas rode with Nat'asha and P'etya to " Uncle 's " house .
Some five male domestic serfs , big and little , rushed out to the front porch to meet their master .
A score of women serfs , old and young , as well as children , popped out from the back entrance to have a look at the hunters who were arriving .
" Ar'inka !
Look , she sits sideways !
There she sits and her skirt dangles ....
See , she 's got a little hunting horn ! "
" Goodness gracious !
See her knife ? ... "
" Is n't she a Tartar ! "
" How is it you did n't go head over heels ?
" asked the boldest of all , addressing Nat'asha directly .
The serfs all dispersed . "
Uncle " lifted Nat'asha off her horse and taking her hand led her up the rickety wooden steps of the porch .
The house , with its bare , unplastered log walls , was not overclean - it did not seem that those living in it aimed at keeping it spotless - but neither was it noticeably neglected .
In the entry there was a smell of fresh apples , and wolf and fox skins hung about .
The study smelt strongly of tobacco and dogs .
" Uncle " asked his visitors to sit down and make themselves at home , and then went out of the room .
Rug'ay , his back still muddy , came into the room and lay down on the sofa , cleaning himself with his tongue and teeth .
Leading from the study was a passage in which a partition with ragged curtains could be seen .
From behind this came women 's laughter and whispers .
Nat'asha , Nicholas , and P'etya took off their wraps and sat down on the sofa .
P'etya , leaning on his elbow , fell asleep at once .
Nat'asha and Nicholas were silent .
Their faces glowed , they were hungry and very cheerful .
After a while " Uncle " came in , in a Cossack coat , blue trousers , and small top boots .
And Nat'asha felt that this costume , the very one she had regarded with surprise and amusement at Otr'adnoe , was just the right thing and not at all worse than a swallow - tail or frock coat . "
Uncle " too was in high spirits and far from being offended by the brother 's and sister 's laughter ( it could never enter his head that they might be laughing at his way of life )
he himself joined in the merriment .
" That 's right , young countess , that 's it , come on !
I never saw anyone like her ! "
said he , offering Nicholas a pipe with a long stem and , with a practiced motion of three fingers , taking down another that had been cut short .
" She 's ridden all day like a man , and is as fresh as ever ! "
With hospitable dignity and cordiality in her glance and in every motion , she looked at the visitors and , with a pleasant smile , bowed respectfully .
In spite of her exceptional stoutness , which caused her to protrude her chest and stomach and throw back her head , this woman ( who was " Uncle 's " housekeeper ) trod very lightly .
She went to the table , set down the tray , and with her plump white hands deftly took from it the bottles and various hors d'oeuvres and dishes and arranged them on the table .
When she had finished , she stepped aside and stopped at the door with a smile on her face . "
Here I am .
I am she !
Now do you understand ' Uncle ' ? "
her expression said to Rost'ov .
How could one help understanding ?
Not only Nicholas , but even Nat'asha understood the meaning of his puckered brow and the happy complacent smile that slightly puckered his lips when An'isya F"edorovna entered .
Afterwards she brought a freshly roasted chicken , ham , preserves made with honey , and preserves made with sugar .
All this was the fruit of An'isya F"edorovna 's housekeeping , gathered and prepared by her .
The smell and taste of it all had a smack of An'isya F"edorovna herself : a savor of juiciness , cleanliness , whiteness , and pleasant smiles .
" Take this , little Lady - Countess ! " she kept saying , as she offered Nat'asha first one thing and then another .
Nat'asha ate of everything and thought she had never seen or eaten such buttermilk cakes , such aromatic jam , such honey - and - nut sweets , or such a chicken anywhere .
An'isya F"edorovna left the room .
After supper , over their cherry brandy , Rost'ov and " Uncle " talked of past and future hunts , of Rug'ay and Il'agin 's dogs , while Nat'asha sat upright on the sofa and listened with sparkling eyes .
She tried several times to wake P'etya that he might eat something , but he only muttered incoherent words without waking up .
Nat'asha felt so lighthearted and happy in these novel surroundings that she only feared the trap would come for her too soon .
After a casual pause , such as often occurs when receiving friends for the first time in one 's own house , " Uncle , " answering a thought that was in his visitors ' minds , said :
" This , you see , is how I am finishing my days ...
Death will come .
That 's it , come on !
Nothing will remain .
Then why harm anyone ? "
" Uncle 's " face was very significant and even handsome as he said this .
Involuntarily Rost'ov recalled all the good he had heard about him from his father and the neighbors .
Throughout the whole province " Uncle " had the reputation of being the most honorable and disinterested of cranks .
" Why do n't you enter the service , Uncle ? "
" I did once , but gave it up .
I am not fit for it .
That 's it , come on !
I ca n't make head or tail of it .
That 's for you -
I have n't brains enough .
Now , hunting is another matter
- that 's it , come on !
Open the door , there ! "
he shouted .
" Why have you shut it ? "
The door at the end of the passage led to the huntsmen 's room , as they called the room for the hunt servants .
Nat'asha had been listening to those strains for some time and now went out into the passage to hear better .
" That 's M'itka , my coachman ....
I have got him a good balal'ayka .
I 'm fond of it , " said " Uncle . "
It was the custom for M'itka to play the balal'ayka in the huntsmen 's room when " Uncle " returned from the chase . "
Uncle " was fond of such music .
" How good !
Really very good ! "
said Nicholas with some unintentional superciliousness , as if ashamed to confess that the sounds pleased him very much .
" Very good ? " said Nat'asha reproachfully , noticing her brother 's tone .
"
Not ' very good '
it 's simply delicious ! "
" More , please , more ! " cried Nat'asha at the door as soon as the balal'ayka ceased .
M'itka tuned up afresh , and recommenced thrumming the balal'ayka to the air of My Lady , with trills and variations . "
Uncle " sat listening , slightly smiling , with his head on one side .
The air was repeated a hundred times .
The balal'ayka was retuned several times and the same notes were thrummed again , but the listeners did not grow weary of it and wished to hear it again and again .
An'isya F"edorovna came in and leaned her portly person against the doorpost .
" You like listening ? " she said to Nat'asha , with a smile extremely like " Uncle 's . "
" That 's a good player of ours , " she added .
" He does n't play that part right ! " said " Uncle " suddenly , with an energetic gesture . "
Here he ought to burst out - that 's it , come on!-ought to burst out . "
" Do you play then ? " asked Nat'asha .
" Uncle " did not answer , but smiled .
" An'isya , go and see if the strings of my guitar are all right .
I have n't touched it for a long time .
That 's it - come on !
I 've given it up . "
An'isya F"edorovna , with her light step , willingly went to fulfill her errand and brought back the guitar .
Without looking at anyone , " Uncle " blew the dust off it and , tapping the case with his bony fingers , tuned the guitar and settled himself in his armchair .
The tune , played with precision and in exact time , began to thrill in the hearts of Nicholas and Nat'asha , arousing in them the same kind of sober mirth as radiated from An'isya F"edorovna 's whole being .
An'isya F"edorovna flushed , and drawing her kerchief over her face went laughing out of the room . "
Uncle " continued to play correctly , carefully , with energetic firmness , looking with a changed and inspired expression at the spot where An'isya F"edorovna had just stood .
" Lovely , lovely !
Go on , Uncle , go on ! "
shouted Nat'asha as soon as he had finished .
She jumped up and hugged and kissed him . "
Nicholas , Nicholas !
" she said , turning to her brother , as if asking him : " What is it moves me so ? "
Nicholas too was greatly pleased by " Uncle 's " playing , and " Uncle " played the piece over again .
An'isya F"edorovna 's smiling face reappeared in the doorway and behind hers other faces ...
Fetching water clear and sweet , Stop , dear maiden , I entreat-
played " Uncle " once more , running his fingers skillfully over the strings , and then he stopped short and jerked his shoulders .
" Go on , Uncle dear , " Nat'asha wailed in an imploring tone as if her life depended on it .
" Now then , niece ! "
he exclaimed , waving to Nat'asha the hand that had just struck a chord .
Nat'asha threw off the shawl from her shoulders , ran forward to face " Uncle , " and setting her arms akimbo also made a motion with her shoulders and struck an attitude .
But the spirit and the movements were those inimitable and unteachable Russian ones that " Uncle " had expected of her .
* The French shawl dance .
" Well , little countess ; that 's it - come on ! " cried " Uncle , " with a joyous laugh , having finished the dance . "
Well done , niece !
Now a fine young fellow must be found as husband for you .
That 's it - come on ! "
" He 's chosen already , " said Nicholas smiling .
" Oh ? " said " Uncle " in surprise , looking inquiringly at Nat'asha , who nodded her head with a happy smile .
" And such a one ! "
she said .
But as soon as she had said it a new train of thoughts and feelings arose in her .
" What did Nicholas ' smile mean when he said ' chosen already ' ?
Is he glad of it or not ?
It is as if he thought my Bolk'onski would not approve of or understand our gaiety .
But he would understand it all .
Where is he now ?
" she thought , and her face suddenly became serious .
But this lasted only a second . "
Do n't dare to think about it , " she said to herself , and sat down again smilingly beside " Uncle , " begging him to play something more .
" Uncle " played another song and a valse ; then after a pause he cleared his throat and sang his favorite hunting song :
As ' twas growing dark last night Fell the snow so soft and light ...
As a result of this the unconsidered tune , like the song of a bird , was extraordinarily good .
Nat'asha was in ecstasies over " Uncle 's " singing .
She resolved to give up learning the harp and to play only the guitar .
She asked " Uncle " for his guitar and at once found the chords of the song .
After nine o'clock two traps and three mounted men , who had been sent to look for them , arrived to fetch Nat'asha and P'etya .
The count and countess did not know where they were and were very anxious , said one of the men .
P'etya was carried out like a log and laid in the larger of the two traps .
Nat'asha and Nicholas got into the other . "
Uncle " wrapped Nat'asha up warmly and took leave of her with quite a new tenderness .
He accompanied them on foot as far as the bridge that could not be crossed , so that they had to go round by the ford , and he sent huntsmen to ride in front with lanterns .
" Good - by , dear niece , " his voice called out of the darkness - not the voice Nat'asha had known previously , but the one that had sung As ' twas growing dark last night .
In the village through which they passed there were red lights and a cheerful smell of smoke .
" What a darling Uncle is ! " said Nat'asha , when they had come out onto the highroad .
" Yes , " returned Nicholas .
" You 're not cold ? "
" No . I 'm quite , quite all right .
I feel so comfortable ! "
answered Nat'asha , almost perplexed by her feelings .
They remained silent a long while .
The night was dark and damp .
They could not see the horses , but only heard them splashing through the unseen mud .
What was passing in that receptive childlike soul that so eagerly caught and assimilated all the diverse impressions of life ?
How did they all find place in her ?
But she was very happy .
As they were nearing home she suddenly struck up the air of
As ' twas growing dark last night - the tune of which she had all the way been trying to get and had at last caught .
" Got it ? " said Nicholas .
" What were you thinking about just now , Nicholas ? " inquired Nat'asha .
They were fond of asking one another that question .
" I ? " said Nicholas , trying to remember .
What a good fellow Uncle is !
Do n't you think so ? ...
Well , and you ? "
" I ?
Wait a bit ,
wait ....
And then I thought ...
No , nothing else . "
" I know , I expect you thought of him , " said Nicholas , smiling as Nat'asha knew by the sound of his voice .
" No , " said Nat'asha , though she had in reality been thinking about Prince Andrew at the same time as of the rest , and of how he would have liked " Uncle . "
" And then I was saying to myself all the way , ' How well An'isya carried herself , how well ! ' "
And Nicholas heard her spontaneous , happy , ringing laughter . "
And do you know , " she suddenly said , " I know that I shall never again be as happy and tranquil as I am now . "
" Rubbish , nonsense , humbug ! " exclaimed Nicholas , and he thought : " How charming this Nat'asha of mine is !
I have no other friend like her and never shall have .
Why should she marry ?
We might always drive about together ! "
" What a darling this Nicholas of mine is ! " thought Nat'asha .
" Ah , there are still lights in the drawing room ! " she said , pointing to the windows of the house that gleamed invitingly in the moist velvety darkness of the night .
CHAPTER VIII
Count Ily'a Rost'ov had resigned the position of Marshal of the Nobility because it involved him in too much expense , but still his affairs did not improve .
Nat'asha and Nicholas often noticed their parents conferring together anxiously and privately and heard suggestions of selling the fine ancestral Rost'ov house and estate near Moscow .
These were all their own people who had settled down in the house almost as members of the family , or persons who were , it seemed , obliged to live in the count 's house .
They had not as many visitors as before , but the old habits of life without which the count and countess could not conceive of existence remained unchanged .
- he let himself be plundered of hundreds of rubles every day by his neighbors , who looked upon an opportunity to play a rubber with Count Rost'ov as a most profitable source of income .
From her feminine point of view she could see only one solution , namely , for Nicholas to marry a rich heiress .
She felt this to be their last hope and that if Nicholas refused the match she had found for him , she would have to abandon the hope of ever getting matters right .
The countess had written direct to Julie 's mother in Moscow suggesting a marriage between their children and had received a favorable answer from her .
Kar'agina had replied that for her part she was agreeable , and everything depend on her daughter 's inclination .
She invited Nicholas to come to Moscow .
Several times the countess , with tears in her eyes , told her son that now both her daughters were settled , her only wish was to see him married .
She said she could lie down in her grave peacefully if that were accomplished .
Then she told him that she knew of a splendid girl and tried to discover what he thought about marriage .
At other times she praised Julie to him and advised him to go to Moscow during the holidays to amuse himself .
Nicholas guessed what his mother 's remarks were leading to and during one of these conversations induced her to speak quite frankly .
She told him that her only hope of getting their affairs disentangled now lay in his marrying Julie Kar'agina .
" But , Mamma , suppose I loved a girl who has no fortune , would you expect me to sacrifice my feelings and my honor for the sake of money ?
" he asked his mother , not realizing the cruelty of his question and only wishing to show his noble - mindedness .
" No , you have not understood me , " said his mother , not knowing how to justify herself .
" You have not understood me , Nik'olenka .
It is your happiness I wish for , " she added , feeling that she was telling an untruth and was becoming entangled .
She began to cry .
" Mamma , do n't cry !
Only tell me that you wish it , and you know I will give my life , anything , to put you at ease , " said Nicholas .
" I would sacrifice anything for you - even my feelings . "
But the countess did not want the question put like that : she did not want a sacrifice from her son , she herself wished to make a sacrifice for him .
" No , you have not understood me , do n't let us talk about it , " she replied , wiping away her tears .
" Maybe I do love a poor girl , " said Nicholas to himself .
" Am I to sacrifice my feelings and my honor for money ?
I wonder how Mamma could speak so to me .
Because S'onya is poor I must not love her , " he thought , " must not respond to her faithful , devoted love ?
Yet I should certainly be happier with her than with some doll - like Julie .
I can always sacrifice my feelings for my family 's welfare , " he said to himself , " but I ca n't coerce my feelings .
If I love S'onya , that feeling is for me stronger and higher than all else . "
Nicholas did not go to Moscow , and the countess did not renew the conversation with him about marriage .
She saw with sorrow , and sometimes with exasperation , symptoms of a growing attachment between her son and the portionless S'onya .
Nicholas was spending the last of his leave at home .
She felt sorry for herself : sorry that she was being wasted all this time and of no use to anyone - while she felt herself so capable of loving and being loved .
Things were not cheerful in the Rost'ovs ' home .
CHAPTER IX
On the third day of Christmas week , after the midday dinner , all the inmates of the house dispersed to various rooms .
It was the dullest time of the day .
Nicholas , who had been visiting some neighbors that morning , was asleep on the sitting - room sofa .
The old count was resting in his study .
S'onya sat in the drawing room at the round table , copying a design for embroidery .
The countess was playing patience .
Nast'asya Iv'anovna the buffoon sat with a sad face at the window with two old ladies .
Nat'asha came into the room , went up to S'onya , glanced at what she was doing , and then went up to her mother and stood without speaking .
" Why are you wandering about like an outcast ? " asked her mother .
" What do you want ? "
" Him ... I want him ... now , this minute !
I want him ! "
said Nat'asha , with glittering eyes and no sign of a smile .
The countess lifted her head and looked attentively at her daughter .
" Do n't look at me , Mamma !
Do n't look ; I shall cry directly . "
" Sit down with me a little , " said the countess .
" Mamma , I want him .
Why should I be wasted like this , Mamma ? "
Her voice broke , tears gushed from her eyes , and she turned quickly to hide them and left the room .
She passed into the sitting room , stood there thinking awhile , and then went into the maids ' room .
There an old maidservant was grumbling at a young girl who stood panting , having just run in through the cold from the serfs ' quarters .
" Stop playing - there 's a time for everything , " said the old woman .
" Let her alone , Kondr'atevna , " said Nat'asha .
" Go , Mavr'ushka , go . "
Having released Mavr'ushka , Nat'asha crossed the dancing hall and went to the vestibule .
There an old footman and two young ones were playing cards .
They broke off and rose as she entered .
" What can I do with them ? " thought Nat'asha .
" Oh , Nik'ita , please go ... where can I send him ? ...
Yes , go to the yard and fetch a fowl , please , a cock , and you , Misha , bring me some oats . "
" Just a few oats ? " said Misha , cheerfully and readily .
" Go , go quickly , " the old man urged him .
" And you , Theodore , get me a piece of chalk . "
On her way past the butler 's pantry she told them to set a samovar , though it was not at all the time for tea .
F'oka , the butler , was the most ill - tempered person in the house .
Nat'asha liked to test her power over him .
He distrusted the order and asked whether the samovar was really wanted .
" Oh dear , what a young lady ! " said F'oka , pretending to frown at Nat'asha .
No one in the house sent people about or gave them as much trouble as Nat'asha did .
She could not see people unconcernedly , but had to send them on some errand .
She seemed to be trying whether any of them would get angry or sulky with her ; but the serfs fulfilled no one 's orders so readily as they did hers .
" What can I do , where can I go ? " thought she , as she went slowly along the passage .
" Nast'asya Iv'anovna , what sort of children shall I have ?
" she asked the buffoon , who was coming toward her in a woman 's jacket .
" Why , fleas , crickets , grasshoppers , " answered the buffoon .
" O Lord , O Lord , it 's always the same !
Oh , where am I to go ?
What am I to do with myself ? "
And tapping with her heels , she ran quickly upstairs to see Vogel and his wife who lived on the upper story .
Two governesses were sitting with the Vogels at a table , on which were plates of raisins , walnuts , and almonds .
The governesses were discussing whether it was cheaper to live in Moscow or Odessa .
Nat'asha sat down , listened to their talk with a serious and thoughtful air , and then got up again .
Her brother P'etya was upstairs too ; with the man in attendance on him he was preparing fireworks to let off that night .
" P'etya ! P'etya !
" she called to him . "
Carry me downstairs . "
P'etya ran up and offered her his back .
She jumped on it , putting her arms round his neck , and he pranced along with her .
" No , do n't ... the island of Madagascar !
" she said , and jumping off his back she went downstairs .
What she drew from the guitar would have had no meaning for other listeners , but in her imagination a whole series of reminiscences arose from those sounds .
She sat behind the bookcase with her eyes fixed on a streak of light escaping from the pantry door and listened to herself and pondered .
She was in a mood for brooding on the past .
S'onya passed to the pantry with a glass in her hand .
Nat'asha glanced at her and at the crack in the pantry door , and it seemed to her that she remembered the light falling through that crack once before and S'onya passing with a glass in her hand . "
Yes it was exactly the same , " thought Nat'asha .
" S'onya , what is this ? " she cried , twanging a thick string .
" Oh , you are there ! "
said S'onya with a start , and came near and listened .
" I do n't know .
A storm ?
" she ventured timidly , afraid of being wrong .
" No , it 's the chorus from The Water - Carrier , listen ! " and Nat'asha sang the air of the chorus so that S'onya should catch it .
" Where were you going ? "
she asked .
" To change the water in this glass .
I am just finishing the design . "
" You always find something to do , but I ca n't , " said Nat'asha .
" And where 's Nicholas ? "
" Asleep , I think . "
" S'onya , go and wake him , " said Nat'asha .
" Tell him I want him to come and sing . "
" Oh , if only he would come quicker !
I am so afraid it will never be !
And , worst of all , I am growing old - that 's the thing !
There wo n't then be in me what there is now .
But perhaps he 'll come today , will come immediately .
Perhaps he has come and is sitting in the drawing room .
Perhaps he came yesterday and I have forgotten it . "
She rose , put down the guitar , and went to the drawing room .
All the domestic circle , tutors , governesses , and guests , were already at the tea table .
The servants stood round the table - but Prince Andrew was not there and life was going on as before .
" Ah , here she is ! " said the old count , when he saw Nat'asha enter .
" Well , sit down by me . "
But Nat'asha stayed by her mother and glanced round as if looking for something .
" Mamma ! " she muttered , " give him to me , give him , Mamma , quickly , quickly ! " and she again had difficulty in repressing her sobs .
She sat down at the table and listened to the conversation between the elders and Nicholas , who had also come to the table .
" My God , my God !
The same faces , the same talk ,
Papa holding his cup and blowing in the same way ! "
thought Nat'asha , feeling with horror a sense of repulsion rising up in her for the whole household , because they were always the same .
After tea , Nicholas , S'onya , and Nat'asha went to the sitting room , to their favorite corner where their most intimate talks always began .
CHAPTER X
And to feel not exactly dull , but sad ? "
" I should think so ! "
he replied .
" I have felt like that when everything was all right and everyone was cheerful .
The thought has come into my mind that I was already tired of it all , and that we must all die .
Once in the regiment I had not gone to some merrymaking where there was music ... and suddenly I felt so depressed ... "
" Oh yes , I know , I know , I know ! "
Nat'asha interrupted him .
" When I was quite little that used to be so with me .
Do you remember when I was punished once about some plums ?
You were all dancing , and I sat sobbing in the schoolroom ?
I shall never forget it :
I felt sad and sorry for everyone , for myself , and for everyone .
And I was innocent - that was the chief thing , " said Nat'asha .
" Do you remember ? "
" I remember , " answered Nicholas .
" I remember that I came to you afterwards and wanted to comfort you , but do you know , I felt ashamed to .
We were terribly absurd .
I had a funny doll then and wanted to give it to you .
Do you remember ? "
" A Negro , " chimed in Nicholas with a smile of delight . " Of course I remember .
Even now I do n't know whether there really was a Negro , or if we only dreamed it or were told about him . "
" He was gray , you remember , and had white teeth , and stood and looked at us .... "
" S'onya , do you remember ? " asked Nicholas .
" Yes , yes , I do remember something too , " S'onya answered timidly .
" You know I have asked Papa and Mamma about that Negro , " said Nat'asha , " and they say there was no Negro at all .
But you see , you remember ! "
" Of course I do , I remember his teeth as if I had just seen them . "
" How strange it is !
It 's as if it were a dream !
I like that . "
" And do you remember how we rolled hard - boiled eggs in the ballroom , and suddenly two old women began spinning round on the carpet ?
Was that real or not ?
Do you remember what fun it was ? "
" Yes , and you remember how Papa in his blue overcoat fired a gun in the porch ? "
S'onya , as always , did not quite keep pace with them , though they shared the same reminiscences .
Much that they remembered had slipped from her mind , and what she recalled did not arouse the same poetic feeling as they experienced .
She simply enjoyed their pleasure and tried to fit in with it .
She only really took part when they recalled S'onya 's first arrival .
She told them how afraid she had been of Nicholas because he had on a corded jacket and her nurse had told her that she , too , would be sewn up with cords .
While they were talking a maid thrust her head in at the other door of the sitting room .
" They have brought the cock , Miss , " she said in a whisper .
" It is n't wanted , P'olya .
Tell them to take it away , " replied Nat'asha .
In the middle of their talk in the sitting room , Dimmler came in and went up to the harp that stood there in a corner .
He took off its cloth covering , and the harp gave out a jarring sound .
" Mr. Dimmler , please play my favorite nocturne by Field , " came the old countess ' voice from the drawing room .
Dimmler struck a chord and , turning to Nat'asha , Nicholas , and S'onya , remarked : " How quiet you young people are ! "
" Yes , we 're philosophizing , " said Nat'asha , glancing round for a moment and then continuing the conversation .
They were now discussing dreams .
Dimmler began to play ; Nat'asha went on tiptoe noiselessly to the table , took up a candle , carried it out , and returned , seating herself quietly in her former place .
It was dark in the room especially where they were sitting on the sofa , but through the big windows the silvery light of the full moon fell on the floor .
Dimmler had finished the piece but still sat softly running his fingers over the strings , evidently uncertain whether to stop or to play something else .
" That is metempsychosis , " said S'onya , who had always learned well , and remembered everything .
" The Egyptians believed that our souls have lived in animals , and will go back into animals again . "
" No , I do n't believe we ever were in animals , " said Nat'asha , still in a whisper though the music had ceased .
" But I am certain that we were angels somewhere there , and have been here , and that is why we remember .... "
" May I join you ? " said Dimmler who had come up quietly , and he sat down by them .
" If we have been angels , why have we fallen lower ? " said Nicholas .
" No , that ca n't be ! "
" Not lower , who said we were lower ? ...
How do I know what I was before ? "
Nat'asha rejoined with conviction .
" The soul is immortal
- well then , if I shall always live I must have lived before , lived for a whole eternity . "
" Yes , but it is hard for us to imagine eternity , " remarked Dimmler , who had joined the young folk with a mildly condescending smile but now spoke as quietly and seriously as they .
" Why is it hard to imagine eternity ? " said Nat'asha .
" It is now today , and it will be tomorrow , and always ; and there was yesterday , and the day before .... "
" Nat'asha !
Now it 's your turn .
Sing me something , " they heard the countess say .
" Why are you sitting there like conspirators ? "
" Mamma , I do n't at all want to , " replied Nat'asha , but all the same she rose .
None of them , not even the middle - aged Dimmler , wanted to break off their conversation and quit that corner in the sitting room , but Nat'asha got up and Nicholas sat down at the clavichord .
Standing as usual in the middle of the hall and choosing the place where the resonance was best , Nat'asha began to sing her mother 's favorite song .
She had said she did not want to sing , but it was long since she had sung , and long before she again sang , as she did that evening .
Nicholas did not take his eyes off his sister and drew breath in time with her .
S'onya , as she listened , thought of the immense difference there was between herself and her friend , and how impossible it was for her to be anything like as bewitching as her cousin .
The old countess sat with a blissful yet sad smile and with tears in her eyes , occasionally shaking her head .
She thought of Nat'asha and of her own youth , and of how there was something unnatural and dreadful in this impending marriage of Nat'asha and Prince Andrew .
Dimmler , who had seated himself beside the countess , listened with closed eyes .
" Ah , Countess , " he said at last , " that 's a European talent , she has nothing to learn - what softness , tenderness , and strength .... "
" Ah , how afraid I am for her , how afraid I am ! " said the countess , not realizing to whom she was speaking .
Her maternal instinct told her that Nat'asha had too much of something , and that because of this she would not be happy .
Before Nat'asha had finished singing , fourteen - year - old P'etya rushed in delightedly , to say that some mummers had arrived .
Nat'asha stopped abruptly .
" Idiot ! "
she screamed at her brother and , running to a chair , threw herself on it , sobbing so violently that she could not stop for a long time .
" It 's nothing , Mamma , really it 's nothing ; only P'etya startled me , " she said , trying to smile , but her tears still flowed and sobs still choked her .
The countess , when she had identified them and laughed at their costumes , went into the drawing room .
The count sat in the ballroom , smiling radiantly and applauding the players .
The young people had disappeared .
Half an hour later there appeared among the other mummers in the ballroom an old lady in a hooped skirt - this was Nicholas .
A Turkish girl was P'etya .
A clown was Dimmler .
An hussar was Nat'asha , and a Circassian was S'onya with burnt - cork mustache and eyebrows .
After the condescending surprise , nonrecognition , and praise , from those who were not themselves dressed up , the young people decided that their costumes were so good that they ought to be shown elsewhere .
" No , why disturb the old fellow ? " said the countess .
" Besides , you would n't have room to turn round there .
If you must go , go to the Melyuk'ovs ' . "
Melyuk'ova was a widow , who , with her family and their tutors and governesses , lived three miles from the Rost'ovs .
" That 's right , my dear , " chimed in the old count , thoroughly aroused .
" I 'll dress up at once and go with them .
I 'll make Pashette open her eyes . "
But the countess would not agree to his going ; he had had a bad leg all these last days .
S'onya 's costume was the best of all .
Her mustache and eyebrows were extraordinarily becoming .
Everyone told her she looked very handsome , and she was in a spirited and energetic mood unusual with her .
Some inner voice told her that now or never her fate would be decided , and in her male attire she seemed quite a different person .
Louisa Iv'anovna consented to go , and in half an hour four troyka sleighs with large and small bells , their runners squeaking and whistling over the frozen snow , drove up to the porch .
Nicholas , in his old lady 's dress over which he had belted his hussar overcoat , stood in the middle of the sleigh , reins in hand .
" You go ahead , Zakh'ar ! " shouted Nicholas to his father 's coachman , wishing for a chance to race past him .
The old count 's troyka , with Dimmler and his party , started forward , squeaking on its runners as though freezing to the snow , its deep - toned bell clanging .
The side horses , pressing against the shafts of the middle horse , sank in the snow , which was dry and glittered like sugar , and threw it up .
Nicholas set off , following the first sleigh ; behind him the others moved noisily , their runners squeaking .
At first they drove at a steady trot along the narrow road .
" A hare 's track , a lot of tracks ! " rang out Nat'asha 's voice through the frost - bound air .
" How light it is , Nicholas ! " came S'onya 's voice .
Nicholas glanced round at S'onya , and bent down to see her face closer .
Quite a new , sweet face with black eyebrows and mustaches peeped up at him from her sable furs - so close and yet so distant - in the moonlight .
" That used to be S'onya , " thought he , and looked at her closer and smiled .
" What is it , Nicholas ? "
" Nothing , " said he and turned again to the horses .
When they came out onto the beaten highroad - polished by sleigh runners and cut up by rough - shod hoofs , the marks of which were visible in the moonlight -
the horses began to tug at the reins of their own accord and increased their pace .
The near side horse , arching his head and breaking into a short canter , tugged at his traces .
The shaft horse swayed from side to side , moving his ears as if asking : " Is n't it time to begin now ? "
In front , already far ahead the deep bell of the sleigh ringing farther and farther off , the black horses driven by Zakh'ar could be clearly seen against the white snow .
From that sleigh one could hear the shouts , laughter , and voices of the mummers .
" Gee up , my darlings ! " shouted Nicholas , pulling the reins to one side and flourishing the whip .
It was only by the keener wind that met them and the jerks given by the side horses who pulled harder - ever increasing their gallop - that one noticed how fast the troyka was flying .
Nicholas looked back .
With screams , squeals , and waving of whips that caused even the shaft horses to gallop - the other sleighs followed .
The shaft horse swung steadily beneath the bow over its head , with no thought of slackening pace and ready to put on speed when required .
Nicholas overtook the first sleigh .
They were driving downhill and coming out upon a broad trodden track across a meadow , near a river .
" Where are we ? " thought he .
" It 's the Kos'oy meadow , I suppose .
But no - this is something new I 've never seen before .
This is n't the Kos'oy meadow nor the D"emkin hill , and heaven only knows what it is !
It is something new and enchanted .
Well , whatever it may be ... "
And shouting to his horses , he began to pass the first sleigh .
Zakh'ar held back his horses and turned his face , which was already covered with hoarfrost to his eyebrows .
Nicholas gave the horses the rein , and Zakh'ar , stretching out his arms , clucked his tongue and let his horses go .
" Now , look out , master ! " he cried .
Faster still the two troykas flew side by side , and faster moved the feet of the galloping side horses .
Nicholas began to draw ahead .
Zakh'ar , while still keeping his arms extended , raised one hand with the reins .
" No you wo n't , master ! " he shouted .
Nicholas put all his horses to a gallop and passed Zakh'ar .
The whistling sound of the runners on the snow and the voices of girls shrieking were heard from different sides .
Again checking his horses , Nicholas looked around him .
They were still surrounded by the magic plain bathed in moonlight and spangled with stars .
" Zakh'ar is shouting that I should turn to the left , but why to the left ? " thought Nicholas .
" Are we getting to the Melyuk'ovs ' ?
Is this Melyuk'ovka ?
Heaven only knows where we are going , and heaven knows what is happening to us - but it is very strange and pleasant whatever it is . "
And he looked round in the sleigh .
" Look , his mustache and eyelashes are all white ! " said one of the strange , pretty , unfamiliar people - the one with fine eyebrows and mustache .
" I think this used to be Nat'asha , " thought Nicholas , " and that was Madame Schoss , but perhaps it 's not , and this Circassian with the mustache
I do n't know , but I love her . "
" Are n't you cold ? " he asked .
They did not answer but began to laugh .
Dimmler from the sleigh behind shouted something - probably something funny - but they could not make out what he said .
" Yes , yes ! " some voices answered , laughing .
" But here was a fairy forest with black moving shadows , and a glitter of diamonds and a flight of marble steps and the silver roofs of fairy buildings and the shrill yells of some animals .
And if this is really Melyuk'ovka , it is still stranger that we drove heaven knows where and have come to Melyuk'ovka , " thought Nicholas .
It really was Melyuk'ovka , and maids and footmen with merry faces came running , out to the porch carrying candles .
" Who is it ? "
asked someone in the porch .
" The mummers from the count 's .
I know by the horses , " replied some voices .
CHAPTER XI
Pelag'eya Dan'ilovna Melyuk'ova , a broadly built , energetic woman wearing spectacles , sat in the drawing room in a loose dress , surrounded by her daughters whom she was trying to keep from feeling dull .
They were quietly dropping melted wax into snow and looking at the shadows the wax figures would throw on the wall , when they heard the steps and voices of new arrivals in the vestibule .
Hussars , ladies , witches , clowns , and bears , after clearing their throats and wiping the hoarfrost from their faces in the vestibule , came into the ballroom where candles were hurriedly lighted .
The clown - Dimmler - and the lady - Nicholas - started a dance .
Surrounded by the screaming children the mummers , covering their faces and disguising their voices , bowed to their hostess and arranged themselves about the room .
" Dear me ! there 's no recognizing them !
And Nat'asha ! See whom she looks like !
She really reminds me of somebody .
But Herr Dimmler - isn't he good !
I did n't know him !
And how he dances .
Dear me , there 's a Circassian .
Really , how becoming it is to dear S'onya .
And who is that ?
Well , you have cheered us up !
Nik'ita and Vanya
- clear away the tables !
And we were sitting so quietly .
Ha , ha , ha ! ...
The hussar , the hussar !
Just like a boy !
And the legs ! ...
I ca n't look at him ... " different voices were saying .
Ten minutes later , all the young Melyuk'ovs joined the mummers .
It was not merely Dimmler and the Rost'ovs
she failed to recognize , she did not even recognize her own daughters , or her late husband 's , dressing gowns and uniforms , which they had put on .
" And who is this ? "
she asked her governess , peering into the face of her own daughter dressed up as a Kaz'an - Tartar . "
I suppose it is one of the Rost'ovs !
Well , Mr. Hussar , and what regiment do you serve in ?
" she asked Nat'asha . "
Here , hand some fruit jelly to the Turk !
" she ordered the butler who was handing things round . "
That 's not forbidden by his law . "
" My little S'asha !
Look at S'asha !
" she said .
After Russian country dances and chorus dances , Pelag'eya Dan'ilovna made the serfs and gentry join in one large circle : a ring , a string , and a silver ruble were fetched and they all played games together .
In an hour , all the costumes were crumpled and disordered .
The corked eyebrows and mustaches were smeared over the perspiring , flushed , and merry faces .
Pelag'eya Dan'ilovna began to recognize the mummers , admired their cleverly contrived costumes , and particularly how they suited the young ladies , and she thanked them all for having entertained her so well .
The visitors were invited to supper in the drawing room , and the serfs had something served to them in the ballroom .
" Now to tell one 's fortune in the empty bathhouse is frightening ! " said an old maid who lived with the Melyuk'ovs , during supper .
" Why ? " said the eldest Melyuk'ov girl .
" You would n't go , it takes courage .... "
" I 'll go , " said S'onya .
" Tell what happened to the young lady ! " said the second Melyuk'ov girl .
" Well , " began the old maid , " a young lady once went out , took a cock , laid the table for two , all properly , and sat down .
After sitting a while , she suddenly hears someone coming ... a sleigh drives up with harness bells ; she hears him coming !
He comes in , just in the shape of a man , like an officer - comes in and sits down to table with her . "
" Ah ! ah ! " screamed Nat'asha , rolling her eyes with horror .
" Yes ? And how ... did he speak ? "
" Yes , like a man .
Everything quite all right , and he began persuading her ; and she should have kept him talking till cockcrow , but she got frightened , just got frightened and hid her face in her hands .
Then he caught her up .
It was lucky the maids ran in just then .... "
" Now , why frighten them ? " said Pelag'eya Dan'ilovna .
" Mamma , you used to try your fate yourself ... " said her daughter .
" And how does one do it in a barn ? " inquired S'onya .
" Well , say you went to the barn now , and listened .
It depends on what you hear ; hammering and knocking - that 's bad ; but a sound of shifting grain is good and one sometimes hears that , too . "
" Mamma , tell us what happened to you in the barn . "
Pelag'eya Dan'ilovna smiled .
" Oh , I 've forgotten ... " she replied .
" But none of you would go ? "
" Yes , I will ; Pelag'eya Dan'ilovna , let me !
I 'll go , " said S'onya .
" Well , why not , if you 're not afraid ? "
" Louisa Iv'anovna , may I ? " asked S'onya .
Whether they were playing the ring and string game or the ruble game or talking as now , Nicholas did not leave S'onya 's side , and gazed at her with quite new eyes .
It seemed to him that it was only today , thanks to that burnt - cork mustache , that he had fully learned to know her .
And really , that evening , S'onya was brighter , more animated , and prettier than Nicholas had ever seen her before .
" So that 's what she is like ; what a fool I have been ! "
he thought gazing at her sparkling eyes , and under the mustache a happy rapturous smile dimpled her cheeks , a smile he had never seen before .
" I 'm not afraid of anything , " said S'onya . "
May I go at once ?
" She got up .
They told her where the barn was and how she should stand and listen , and they handed her a fur cloak .
She threw this over her head and shoulders and glanced at Nicholas .
" What a darling that girl is ! " thought he .
"
And what have I been thinking of till now ? "
S'onya went out into the passage to go to the barn .
Nicholas went hastily to the front porch , saying he felt too hot .
The crowd of people really had made the house stuffy .
Outside , there was the same cold stillness and the same moon , but even brighter than before .
The light was so strong and the snow sparkled with so many stars that one did not wish to look up at the sky and the real stars were unnoticed .
The sky was black and dreary , while the earth was gay .
He knew S'onya would pass that way .
Halfway lay some snow - covered piles of firewood and across and along them a network of shadows from the bare old lime trees fell on the snow and on the path .
This path led to the barn .
The log walls of the barn and its snow - covered roof , that looked as if hewn out of some precious stone , sparkled in the moonlight .
A tree in the garden snapped with the frost , and then all was again perfectly silent .
His bosom seemed to inhale not air but the strength of eternal youth and gladness .
Only , do n't look back . "
" I am not afraid , " answered S'onya 's voice , and along the path toward Nicholas came the crunching , whistling sound of S'onya 's feet in her thin shoes .
S'onya came along , wrapped in her cloak .
She was only a couple of paces away when she saw him , and to her too he was not the Nicholas she had known and always slightly feared .
He was in a woman 's dress , with tousled hair and a happy smile new to S'onya .
She ran rapidly toward him .
" Quite different and yet the same , " thought Nicholas , looking at her face all lit up by the moonlight .
He slipped his arms under the cloak that covered her head , embraced her , pressed her to him , and kissed her on the lips that wore a mustache and had a smell of burnt cork .
S'onya kissed him full on the lips , and disengaging her little hands pressed them to his cheeks .
" S'onya ! ...
Nicholas ! "
... was all they said .
They ran to the barn and then back again , re - entering , he by the front and
she by the back porch .
CHAPTER XII
" S'onya , is it well with thee ?
" he asked from time to time .
" Yes ! " she replied . "
And with thee ? "
When halfway home Nicholas handed the reins to the coachman and ran for a moment to Nat'asha 's sleigh and stood on its wing .
" Nat'asha ! " he whispered in French , " do you know I have made up my mind about S'onya ? "
" Have you told her ? "
asked Nat'asha , suddenly beaming all over with joy .
" Oh , how strange you are with that mustache and those eyebrows ! ...
Nat'asha - are you glad ? "
" I am so glad , so glad !
I was beginning to be vexed with you .
I did not tell you , but you have been treating her badly .
What a heart she has , Nicholas !
I am horrid sometimes , but I was ashamed to be happy while S'onya was not , " continued Nat'asha . "
Now I am so glad !
Well , run back to her . "
" No , wait a bit ....
Oh , how funny you look ! "
cried Nicholas , peering into her face and finding in his sister too something new , unusual , and bewitchingly tender that he had not seen in her before .
" Nat'asha , it 's magical , is n't it ? "
" Yes , " she replied .
" You have done splendidly . "
" So you are glad and I have done right ? "
" Oh , quite right !
I had a quarrel with Mamma some time ago about it .
Mamma said she was angling for you .
How could she say such a thing !
I nearly stormed at Mamma .
I will never let anyone say anything bad of S'onya , for there is nothing but good in her . "
" Then it 's all right ? " said Nicholas , again scrutinizing the expression of his sister 's face to see if she was in earnest .
Then he jumped down and , his boots scrunching the snow , ran back to his sleigh .
When they reached home and had told their mother how they had spent the evening at the Melyuk'ovs ' , the girls went to their bedroom .
When they had undressed , but without washing off the cork mustaches , they sat a long time talking of their happiness .
They talked of how they would live when they were married , how their husbands would be friends , and how happy they would be .
On Nat'asha 's table stood two looking glasses which Duny'asha had prepared beforehand .
" Only when will all that be ?
I am afraid never ....
It would be too good ! "
said Nat'asha , rising and going to the looking glasses .
" Sit down , Nat'asha ; perhaps you 'll see him , " said S'onya .
Nat'asha lit the candles , one on each side of one of the looking glasses , and sat down .
" I see someone with a mustache , " said Nat'asha , seeing her own face .
" You must n't laugh , Miss , " said Duny'asha .
With S'onya 's help and the maid 's , Nat'asha got the glass she held into the right position opposite the other ; her face assumed a serious expression and she sat silent .
But ready as she was to take the smallest speck for the image of a man or of a coffin , she saw nothing .
She began blinking rapidly and moved away from the looking glasses .
" Why is it others see things and I do n't ? " she said .
" You sit down now , S'onya .
You absolutely must , tonight !
Do it for me ....
Today I feel so frightened ! "
S'onya sat down before the glasses , got the right position , and began looking .
" Now , Miss S'onya is sure to see something , " whispered Duny'asha ; " while you do nothing but laugh . "
S'onya heard this and Nat'asha 's whisper :
" I know she will .
She saw something last year . "
For about three minutes all were silent .
" Of course she will ! " whispered Nat'asha , but did not finish ...
suddenly S'onya pushed away the glass she was holding and covered her eyes with her hand .
" Oh , Nat'asha ! " she cried .
" Did you see ?
Did you ?
What was it ? "
exclaimed Nat'asha , holding up the looking glass .
S'onya had not seen anything , she was just wanting to blink and to get up when she heard Nat'asha say , " Of course she will ! "
She did not wish to disappoint either Duny'asha or Nat'asha , but it was hard to sit still .
She did not herself know how or why the exclamation escaped her when she covered her eyes .
" You saw him ? " urged Nat'asha , seizing her hand .
" Yes .
Wait a bit ...
I ... saw him , " S'onya could not help saying , not yet knowing whom Nat'asha meant by him , Nicholas or Prince Andrew .
" But why should n't I say I saw something ?
Others do see !
Besides who can tell whether I saw anything or not ? " flashed through S'onya 's mind .
" Yes , I saw him , " she said .
" How ? Standing or lying ? "
" No , I saw ...
At first there was nothing , then I saw him lying down . "
" Andrew lying ?
Is he ill ? "
asked Nat'asha , her frightened eyes fixed on her friend .
" No , on the contrary , on the contrary !
His face was cheerful , and he turned to me . "
And when saying this she herself fancied she had really seen what she described .
" Well , and then , S'onya ? ... "
" After that , I could not make out what there was ; something blue and red .... "
" S'onya !
When will he come back ?
When shall I see him !
O , God , how afraid I am for him and for myself and about everything ! ...
CHAPTER XIII
Soon after the Christmas holidays Nicholas told his mother of his love for S'onya and of his firm resolve to marry her .
Nicholas , for the first time , felt that his mother was displeased with him and that , despite her love for him , she would not give way .
The old count began irresolutely to admonish Nicholas and beg him to abandon his purpose .
Nicholas replied that he could not go back on his word , and his father , sighing and evidently disconcerted , very soon became silent and went in to the countess .
S'onya listened silently with downcast eyes to the countess ' cruel words , without understanding what was required of her .
She was ready to sacrifice everything for her benefactors .
Self - sacrifice was her most cherished idea but in this case she could not see what she ought to sacrifice , or for whom .
She could not help loving the countess and the whole Rost'ov family , but neither could she help loving Nicholas and knowing that his happiness depended on that love .
She was silent and sad and did not reply .
Nicholas felt the situation to be intolerable and went to have an explanation with his mother .
He first implored her to forgive him and S'onya and consent to their marriage , then he threatened that if she molested S'onya he would at once marry her secretly .
But he had no time to utter the decisive word which the expression of his face caused his mother to await with terror , and which would perhaps have forever remained a cruel memory to them both .
He had not time to say it , for Nat'asha , with a pale and set face , entered the room from the door at which she had been listening .
" Nicholas , you are talking nonsense !
Be quiet , be quiet , be quiet , I tell you ! ...
" she almost screamed , so as to drown his voice .
" Nicholas , I 'll explain to you .
Go away !
Listen , Mamma darling , " said Nat'asha .
Her words were incoherent , but they attained the purpose at which she was aiming .
The countess , sobbing heavily , hid her face on her daughter 's breast , while Nicholas rose , clutching his head , and left the room .
After Nicholas had gone things in the Rost'ov household were more depressing than ever , and the countess fell ill from mental agitation .
S'onya was unhappy at the separation from Nicholas and still more so on account of the hostile tone the countess could not help adopting toward her .
The count was more perturbed than ever by the condition of his affairs , which called for some decisive action .
Their town house and estate near Moscow had inevitably to be sold , and for this they had to go to Moscow .
But the countess ' health obliged them to delay their departure from day to day .
Nat'asha , who had borne the first period of separation from her betrothed lightly and even cheerfully , now grew more agitated and impatient every day .
The thought that her best days , which she would have employed in loving him , were being vainly wasted , with no advantage to anyone , tormented her incessantly .
His letters for the most part irritated her .
It hurt her to think that while she lived only in the thought of him , he was living a real life , seeing new places and new people that interested him .
The more interesting his letters were the more vexed she felt .
Her letters to him , far from giving her any comfort , seemed to her a wearisome and artificial obligation .
She could not write , because she could not conceive the possibility of expressing sincerely in a letter even a thousandth part of what she expressed by voice , smile , and glance .
She wrote to him formal , monotonous , and dry letters , to which she attached no importance herself , and in the rough copies of which the countess corrected her mistakes in spelling .
There was still no improvement in the countess ' health , but it was impossible to defer the journey to Moscow any longer .
Nat'asha 's trousseau had to be ordered and the house sold .
Moreover , Prince Andrew was expected in Moscow , where old Prince Bolk'onski was spending the winter , and Nat'asha felt sure he had already arrived .
So the countess remained in the country , and the count , taking S'onya and Nat'asha with him , went to Moscow at the end of January .
BOOK EIGHT : 1811 - 12
CHAPTER I
After Prince Andrew 's engagement to Nat'asha , Pierre without any apparent cause suddenly felt it impossible to go on living as before .
Only the skeleton of life remained : his house , a brilliant wife who now enjoyed the favors of a very important personage , acquaintance with all Petersburg , and his court service with its dull formalities .
And this life suddenly seemed to Pierre unexpectedly loathsome .
Pierre felt that she was right , and to avoid compromising her went away to Moscow .
In Moscow he felt at peace , at home , warm and dirty as in an old dressing gown .
Moscow society , from the old women down to the children , received Pierre like a long - expected guest whose place was always ready awaiting him .
For Moscow society Pierre was the nicest , kindest , most intellectual , merriest , and most magnanimous of cranks , a heedless , genial nobleman of the old Russian type .
His purse was always empty because it was open to everyone .
There was never a dinner or soiree at the club without him .
As soon as he sank into his place on the sofa after two bottles of Margaux he was surrounded , and talking , disputing , and joking began .
When there were quarrels , his kindly smile and well - timed jests reconciled the antagonists .
The Masonic dinners were dull and dreary when he was not there .
When after a bachelor supper he rose with his amiable and kindly smile , yielding to the entreaties of the festive company to drive off somewhere with them , shouts of delight and triumph arose among the young men .
At balls he danced if a partner was needed .
Young ladies , married and unmarried , liked him because without making love to any of them , he was equally amiable to all , especially after supper . "
Il est charmant ; il n'a pas de sexe , " * they said of him .
* " He is charming ; he has no sex . "
Pierre was one of those retired gentlemen - in - waiting of whom there were hundreds good - humoredly ending their days in Moscow .
He could not have believed it !
Had he not seen the possibility of , and passionately desired , the regeneration of the sinful human race , and his own progress to the highest degree of perfection ?
Had he not established schools and hospitals and liberated his serfs ?
For a long time he could not reconcile himself to the idea that he was one of those same retired Moscow gentlemen - in - waiting he had so despised seven years before .
Pierre no longer suffered moments of despair , hypochondria , and disgust with life , but the malady that had formerly found expression in such acute attacks was driven inwards and never left him for a moment . "
What for ?
Why ?
What is going on in the world ?
Napoleon Bonaparte was despised by all as long as he was great , but now that he has become a wretched comedian the Emperor Francis wants to offer him his daughter in an illegal marriage .
So thought Pierre , and the whole of this general deception which everyone accepts , accustomed as he was to it , astonished him each time as if it were something new .
" I understand the deception and confusion , " he thought , " but how am I to tell them all that I see ?
I have tried , and have always found that they too in the depths of their souls understand it as I do , and only try not to see it .
So it appears that it must be so !
But I - what is to become of me ? "
thought he .
Every sphere of work was connected , in his eyes , with evil and deception .
Whatever he tried to be , whatever he engaged in , the evil and falsehood of it repulsed him and blocked every path of activity .
Yet he had to live and to find occupation .
It was too dreadful to be under the burden of these insoluble problems , so he abandoned himself to any distraction in order to forget them .
He frequented every kind of society , drank much , bought pictures , engaged in building , and above all - read .
He read , and read everything that came to hand .
On coming home , while his valets were still taking off his things , he picked up a book and began to read .
From reading he passed to sleeping , from sleeping to gossip in drawing rooms of the club , from gossip to carousals and women ; from carousals back to gossip , reading , and wine .
Drinking became more and more a physical and also a moral necessity .
Though the doctors warned him that with his corpulence wine was dangerous for him , he drank a great deal .
Only after emptying a bottle or two did he feel dimly that the terribly tangled skein of life which previously had terrified him was not as dreadful as he had thought .
He was always conscious of some aspect of that skein , as with a buzzing in his head after dinner or supper he chatted or listened to conversation or read .
But under the influence of wine he said to himself : " It does n't matter .
I 'll get it unraveled .
I have a solution ready , but have no time now
- I'll think it all out later on ! "
But the later on never came .
In the morning , on an empty stomach , all the old questions appeared as insoluble and terrible as ever , and Pierre hastily picked up a book , and if anyone came to see him he was glad .
Sometimes he remembered how he had heard that soldiers in war when entrenched under the enemy 's fire , if they have nothing to do , try hard to find some occupation the more easily to bear the danger .
" Nothing is trivial , and nothing is important , it 's all the same - only to save oneself from it as best one can , " thought Pierre . "
Only not to see it , that dreadful it ! "
CHAPTER II
At the beginning of winter Prince Nicholas Bolk'onski and his daughter moved to Moscow .
The prince had aged very much that year .
Latterly that private life had become very trying for Princess Mary .
There in Moscow she was deprived of her greatest pleasures - talks with the pilgrims and the solitude which refreshed her at Bald Hills - and she had none of the advantages and pleasures of city life .
She had quite abandoned the hope of getting married .
She saw the coldness and malevolence with which the old prince received and dismissed the young men , possible suitors , who sometimes appeared at their house .
She had no friends : during this visit to Moscow she had been disappointed in the two who had been nearest to her .
Mademoiselle Bourienne , with whom she had never been able to be quite frank , had now become unpleasant to her , and for various reasons Princess Mary avoided her .
Julie , with whom she had corresponded for the last five years , was in Moscow , but proved to be quite alien to her when they met .
Just then Julie , who by the death of her brothers had become one of the richest heiresses in Moscow , was in the full whirl of society pleasures .
She was surrounded by young men who , she fancied , had suddenly learned to appreciate her worth .
Julie was at that stage in the life of a society woman when she feels that her last chance of marrying has come and that her fate must be decided now or never .
On Thursdays Princess Mary remembered with a mournful smile that she now had no one to write to , since Julie - whose presence gave her no pleasure was here and they met every week .
Like the old ' emigr'e who declined to marry the lady with whom he had spent his evenings for years , she regretted Julie 's presence and having no one to write to .
In Moscow Princess Mary had no one to talk to , no one to whom to confide her sorrow , and much sorrow fell to her lot just then .
Another lately added sorrow arose from the lessons she gave her six year - old nephew .
To her consternation she detected in herself in relation to little Nicholas some symptoms of her father 's irritability .
But what distressed the princess most of all was her father 's irritability , which was always directed against her and had of late amounted to cruelty .
Of late he had exhibited a new trait that tormented Princess Mary more than anything else ; this was his ever - increasing intimacy with Mademoiselle Bourienne .
One day in Moscow in Princess Mary 's presence
( she thought her father did it purposely when she was there )
the old prince kissed Mademoiselle Bourienne 's hand and , drawing her to him , embraced her affectionately .
Princess Mary flushed and ran out of the room .
A few minutes later Mademoiselle Bourienne came into Princess Mary 's room smiling and making cheerful remarks in her agreeable voice .
" She did not finish . "
Leave my room , " she exclaimed , and burst into sobs .
Next day the prince did not say a word to his daughter , but she noticed that at dinner he gave orders that Mademoiselle Bourienne should be served first .
After dinner , when the footman handed coffee and from habit began with the princess , the prince suddenly grew furious , threw his stick at Philip , and instantly gave instructions to have him conscripted for the army .
" He does n't obey ...
I said it twice ... and he does n't obey !
She is the first person in this house ; she 's my best friend , " cried the prince . "
Go !
Do n't let me set eyes on you ; beg her pardon ! "
Princess Mary asked Mademoiselle Bourienne 's pardon , and also her father 's pardon for herself and for Philip the footman , who had begged for her intervention .
At such moments something like a pride of sacrifice gathered in her soul .
He is old and feeble , and I dare to condemn him ! "
she thought at such moments , with a feeling of revulsion against herself .
CHAPTER III
In 1811 there was living in Moscow a French doctor - M'etivier - who had rapidly become the fashion .
He was enormously tall , handsome , amiable as Frenchmen are , and was , as all Moscow said , an extraordinarily clever doctor .
He was received in the best houses not merely as a doctor , but as an equal .
Prince Nicholas had always ridiculed medicine , but latterly on Mademoiselle Bourienne 's advice had allowed this doctor to visit him and had grown accustomed to him .
M'etivier came to see the prince about twice a week .
On December 6-St .
Nicholas ' Day and the prince 's name day
- all Moscow came to the prince 's front door but he gave orders to admit no one and to invite to dinner only a small number , a list of whom he gave to Princess Mary .
M'etivier , who came in the morning with his felicitations , considered it proper in his quality of doctor de forcer la consigne , * as he told Princess Mary , and went in to see the prince .
It happened that on that morning of his name day the prince was in one of his worst moods .
He had been going about the house all the morning finding fault with everyone and pretending not to understand what was said to him and not to be understood himself .
Until the doctor 's arrival the morning had passed off safely .
After admitting the doctor , Princess Mary sat down with a book in the drawing room near the door through which she could hear all that passed in the study .
* To force the guard .
" You do n't understand ? " shouted the prince , " but I do !
French spy , slave of Buonaparte , spy , get out of my house !
Be off , I tell you ... " and he slammed the door .
M'etivier , shrugging his shoulders , went up to Mademoiselle Bourienne who at the sound of shouting had run in from an adjoining room .
" The prince is not very well : bile and rush of blood to the head .
Keep calm , I will call again tomorrow , " said M'etivier ; and putting his fingers to his lips he hastened away .
Through the study door came the sound of slippered feet and the cry : " Spies , traitors , traitors everywhere !
Not a moment 's peace in my own house ! "
After M'etivier 's departure the old prince called his daughter in , and the whole weight of his wrath fell on her .
She was to blame that a spy had been admitted .
Had he not told her , yes , told her to make a list , and not to admit anyone who was not on that list ?
Then why was that scoundrel admitted ?
She was the cause of it all .
With her , he said , he could not have a moment 's peace and could not die quietly .
" No , ma'am !
We must part , we must part !
Understand that
, understand it !
I can not endure any more , " he said , and left the room .
Then , as if afraid she might find some means of consolation , he returned and trying to appear calm added : " And do n't imagine I have said this in a moment of anger .
I am calm .
I have thought it over , and it will be carried out - we must part ; so find some place for yourself .... "
But he could not restrain himself and with the virulence of which only one who loves is capable , evidently suffering himself , he shook his fists at her and screamed :
" If only some fool would marry her ! "
Then he slammed the door , sent for Mademoiselle Bourienne , and subsided into his study .
At two o'clock the six chosen guests assembled for dinner .
These guests - the famous Count Rostopch'in , Prince Lopukh'in with his nephew , General Chatr'ov an old war comrade of the prince 's , and of the younger generation Pierre and Bor'is
Drubetsk'oy - awaited the prince in the drawing room .
The prince 's house did not belong to what is known as fashionable society , but his little circle - though not much talked about in town - was one
it was more flattering to be received in than any other .
Bor'is had realized this the week before when the commander in chief in his presence invited Rostopch'in to dinner on St. Nicholas ' Day , and Rostopch'in had replied that he could not come :
" On that day I always go to pay my devotions to the relics of Prince Nicholas Bolk'onski . "
" Oh , yes , yes ! " replied the commander in chief . "
How is he ? ... "
The small group that assembled before dinner in the lofty old - fashioned drawing room with its old furniture resembled the solemn gathering of a court of justice .
All were silent or talked in low tones .
Prince Nicholas came in serious and taciturn .
Princess Mary seemed even quieter and more diffident than usual .
The guests were reluctant to address her , feeling that she was in no mood for their conversation .
Count Rostopch'in alone kept the conversation going , now relating the latest town news , and now the latest political gossip .
Lopukh'in and the old general occasionally took part in the conversation .
Prince Bolk'onski listened as a presiding judge receives a report , only now and then , silently or by a brief word , showing that he took heed of what was being reported to him .
The tone of the conversation was such as indicated that no one approved of what was being done in the political world .
" Bonaparte treats Europe as a pirate does a captured vessel , " said Count Rostopch'in , repeating a phrase he had uttered several times before .
" One only wonders at the long - suffering or blindness of the crowned heads .
Now the Pope 's turn has come and Bonaparte does n't scruple to depose the head of the Catholic Church - yet all keep silent !
Our sovereign alone has protested against the seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg 's territory , and even ... "
Count Rostopch'in paused , feeling that he had reached the limit beyond which censure was impossible .
" Other territories have been offered in exchange for the Duchy of Oldenburg , " said Prince Bolk'onski .
"
He shifts the Dukes about as I might move my serfs from Bald Hills to Boguch'arovo or my Ryaz'an estates . "
" The Duke of Oldenburg bears his misfortunes with admirable strength of character and resignation , " remarked Bor'is , joining in respectfully .
He said this because on his journey from Petersburg he had had the honor of being presented to the Duke .
Prince Bolk'onski glanced at the young man as if about to say something in reply , but changed his mind , evidently considering him too young .
" I have read our protests about the Oldenburg affair and was surprised how badly the Note was worded , " remarked Count Rostopch'in in the casual tone of a man dealing with a subject quite familiar to him .
Pierre looked at Rostopch'in with na"ive astonishment , not understanding why he should be disturbed by the bad composition of the Note .
" Does it matter , Count , how the Note is worded , " he asked , " so long as its substance is forcible ? "
" My dear fellow , with our five hundred thousand troops it should be easy to have a good style , " returned Count Rostopch'in .
Pierre now understood the count 's dissatisfaction with the wording of the Note .
" One would have thought quill drivers enough had sprung up , " remarked the old prince . "
There in Petersburg they are always writing - not notes only but even new laws .
My Andrew there has written a whole volume of laws for Russia .
Nowadays they are always writing ! "
and he laughed unnaturally .
There was a momentary pause in the conversation ; the old general cleared his throat to draw attention .
" Did you hear of the last event at the review in Petersburg ?
The figure cut by the new French ambassador . "
" Eh ? Yes , I heard something : he said something awkward in His Majesty 's presence . "
The Emperor did not condescend to reply .
At the next review , they say , the Emperor did not once deign to address him . "
All were silent .
On this fact relating to the Emperor personally , it was impossible to pass any judgment .
" Impudent fellows ! " said the prince .
" You know M'etivier ?
I turned him out of my house this morning .
He was here ; they admitted him in spite of my request that they should let no one in , " he went on , glancing angrily at his daughter .
And he narrated his whole conversation with the French doctor and the reasons that convinced him that M'etivier was a spy .
Though these reasons were very insufficient and obscure , no one made any rejoinder .
After the roast , champagne was served .
The guests rose to congratulate the old prince .
Princess Mary , too , went round to him .
He gave her a cold , angry look and offered her his wrinkled , clean - shaven cheek to kiss .
The whole expression of his face told her that he had not forgotten the morning 's talk , that his decision remained in force , and only the presence of visitors hindered his speaking of it to her now .
When they went into the drawing room where coffee was served , the old men sat together .
Prince Nicholas grew more animated and expressed his views on the impending war .
He said that our wars with Bonaparte would be disastrous so long as we sought alliances with the Germans and thrust ourselves into European affairs , into which we had been drawn by the Peace of Tilsit .
" We ought not to fight either for or against Austria .
" How can we fight the French , Prince ? " said Count Rostopch'in .
" Can we arm ourselves against our teachers and divinities ?
Look at our youths , look at our ladies !
The French are our Gods : Paris is our Kingdom of Heaven . "
He began speaking louder , evidently to be heard by everyone .
" French dresses , French ideas , French feelings !
There now , you turned M'etivier out by the scruff of his neck because he is a Frenchman and a scoundrel , but our ladies crawl after him on their knees .
I went to a party last night , and there out of five ladies three were Roman Catholics and had the Pope 's indulgence for doing woolwork on Sundays .
And they themselves sit there nearly naked , like the signboards at our Public Baths if I may say so .
All were silent .
The old prince looked at Rostopch'in with a smile and wagged his head approvingly .
" Well , good - by , your excellency , keep well ! " said Rostopch'in , getting up with characteristic briskness and holding out his hand to the prince .
" Good - by , my dear fellow ....
His words are music , I never tire of hearing him ! "
said the old prince , keeping hold of the hand and offering his cheek to be kissed .
Following Rostopch'in 's example the others also rose .
CHAPTER IV
Princess Mary as she sat listening to the old men 's talk and faultfinding , understood nothing of what she heard ; she only wondered whether the guests had all observed her father 's hostile attitude toward her .
She did not even notice the special attentions and amiabilities shown her during dinner by Bor'is Drubetsk'oy , who was visiting them for the third time already .
" May I stay a little longer ? " he said , letting his stout body sink into an armchair beside her .
" Oh yes , " she answered .
" You noticed nothing ? "
her look asked .
Pierre was in an agreeable after - dinner mood .
He looked straight before him and smiled quietly .
" Have you known that young man long , Princess ? " he asked .
" Who ? "
" Drubetsk'oy . "
" No , not long .... "
" Do you like him ? "
" Yes , he is an agreeable young man ....
Why do you ask me that ? " said Princess Mary , still thinking of that morning 's conversation with her father .
" Because I have noticed that when a young man comes on leave from Petersburg to Moscow it is usually with the object of marrying an heiress . "
" You have observed that ? " said Princess Mary .
" Yes , " returned Pierre with a smile , " and this young man now manages matters so that where there is a wealthy heiress there he is too .
I can read him like a book .
At present he is hesitating whom to lay siege to - you or Mademoiselle Julie Kar'agina .
He is very attentive to her . "
" He visits them ? "
" Yes , very often .
And do you know the new way of courting ? " said Pierre with an amused smile , evidently in that cheerful mood of good humored raillery for which he so often reproached himself in his diary .
" No , " replied Princess Mary .
" To please Moscow girls nowadays one has to be melancholy .
He is very melancholy with Mademoiselle Kar'agina , " said Pierre .
" Really ? " asked Princess Mary , looking into Pierre 's kindly face and still thinking of her own sorrow . "
It would be a relief , " thought she , " if I ventured to confide what I am feeling to someone .
I should like to tell everything to Pierre .
He is kind and generous .
It would be a relief .
He would give me advice . "
" Would you marry him ? "
" Oh , my God , Count , there are moments when I would marry anybody ! "
she cried suddenly to her own surprise and with tears in her voice . "
Ah , how bitter it is to love someone near to you and to feel that ...
" she went on in a trembling voice , " that you can do nothing for him but grieve him , and to know that you can not alter this .
Then there is only one thing left - to go away , but where could I go ? "
" What is wrong ?
What is it , Princess ? "
But without finishing what she was saying , Princess Mary burst into tears .
" I do n't know what is the matter with me today .
Do n't take any notice - forget what I have said ! "
Pierre 's gaiety vanished completely .
" Have you any news of the Rost'ovs ?
" she asked , to change the subject .
" I was told they are coming soon .
I am also expecting Andrew any day .
I should like them to meet here . "
" And how does he now regard the matter ? " asked Pierre , referring to the old prince .
Princess Mary shook her head .
" What is to be done ?
In a few months the year will be up .
The thing is impossible .
I only wish I could spare my brother the first moments .
I wish they would come sooner .
I hope to be friends with her .
You have known them a long time , " said Princess Mary .
" Tell me honestly the whole truth : what sort of girl is she , and what do you think of her ?-
The real truth , because you know Andrew is risking so much doing this against his father 's will that I should like to know .... "
" I do n't know how to answer your question , " he said , blushing without knowing why .
" I really do n't know what sort of girl she is ; I ca n't analyze her at all .
She is enchanting , but what makes her so
I do n't know .
That is all one can say about her . "
Princess Mary sighed , and the expression on her face said : " Yes , that 's what I expected and feared . "
" Is she clever ? " she asked .
Pierre considered .
" I think not , " he said , " and yet - yes .
She does not deign to be clever ....
Oh no , she is simply enchanting , and that is all . "
Princess Mary again shook her head disapprovingly .
" Ah , I so long to like her !
Tell her so if you see her before I do . "
" I hear they are expected very soon , " said Pierre .
Princess Mary told Pierre of her plan to become intimate with her future sister - in - law as soon as the Rost'ovs arrived and to try to accustom the old prince to her .
CHAPTER V
Bor'is had not succeeded in making a wealthy match in Petersburg , so with the same object in view he came to Moscow .
There he wavered between the two richest heiresses , Julie and Princess Mary .
Though Princess Mary despite her plainness seemed to him more attractive than Julie , he , without knowing why , felt awkward about paying court to her .
When they had last met on the old prince 's name day , she had answered at random all his attempts to talk sentimentally , evidently not listening to what he was saying .
Julie on the contrary accepted his attentions readily , though in a manner peculiar to herself .
She was twenty - seven .
After the death of her brothers she had become very wealthy .
She was by now decidedly plain , but thought herself not merely as good - looking as before but even far more attractive .
That winter the Kar'agins ' house was the most agreeable and hospitable in Moscow .
In addition to the formal evening and dinner parties , a large company , chiefly of men , gathered there every day , supping at midnight and staying till three in the morning .
Julie never missed a ball , a promenade , or a play .
Her dresses were always of the latest fashion .
She adopted the tone of one who has suffered a great disappointment , like a girl who has either lost the man she loved or been cruelly deceived by him .
Though nothing of the kind had happened to her she was regarded in that light , and had even herself come to believe that she had suffered much in life .
This melancholy , which did not prevent her amusing herself , did not hinder the young people who came to her house from passing the time pleasantly .
To Bor'is , Julie was particularly gracious : she regretted his early disillusionment with life , offered him such consolation of friendship as she who had herself suffered so much could render , and showed him her album .
Bor'is sketched two trees in the album and wrote : " Rustic trees , your dark branches shed gloom and melancholy upon me . "
On another page he drew a tomb , and wrote :
La mort est secourable
et la mort est tranquille .
Ah !
contre les douleurs il n'y a pas d'autre asile . *
* Death gives relief and death is peaceful .
Ah ! from suffering there is no other refuge .
Julie said this was charming
" There is something so enchanting in the smile of melancholy , " she said to Bor'is , repeating word for word a passage she had copied from a book .
" It is a ray of light in the darkness , a shade between sadness and despair , showing the possibility of consolation . "
In reply Bor'is wrote these lines :
Aliment de poison d'une ^ame trop sensible
, Toi , sans qui le bonheur me serait impossible , Tendre m'elancholie , ah ,
viens me consoler ,
Viens calmer les tourments de ma sombre retraite , Et m^ele une douceur secr`ete A ces pleurs que je sens couler .
*
For Bor'is , Julie played most doleful nocturnes on her harp .
Bor'is read Poor Liza aloud to her , and more than once interrupted the reading because of the emotions that choked him .
Meeting at large gatherings Julie and Bor'is looked on one another as the only souls who understood one another in a world of indifferent people .
Anna Mikh'aylovna , who often visited the Kar'agins , while playing cards with the mother made careful inquiries as to Julie 's dowry ( she was to have two estates in P'enza and the Nizheg'orod forests ) .
Anna Mikh'aylovna regarded the refined sadness that united her son to the wealthy Julie with emotion , and resignation to the Divine will .
" You are always charming and melancholy , my dear Julie , " she said to the daughter . "
Bor'is says his soul finds repose at your house .
He has suffered so many disappointments and is so sensitive , " said she to the mother . "
Ah , my dear , I ca n't tell you how fond I have grown of Julie latterly , " she said to her son . "
But who could help loving her ?
She is an angelic being !
Ah , Bor'is , Bor'is!"-she paused . "
And how I pity her mother , " she went on ; " today she showed me her accounts and letters from P'enza
( they have enormous estates there ) , and she , poor thing , has no one to help her , and they do cheat her so ! "
Bor'is smiled almost imperceptibly while listening to his mother .
He laughed blandly at her na"ive diplomacy but listened to what she had to say , and sometimes questioned her carefully about the P'enza and Nizheg'orod estates .
His leave was expiring .
He spent every day and whole days at the Kar'agins ' , and every day on thinking the matter over told himself that he would propose tomorrow .
Her melancholy , however , began to turn to irritability , and not long before Bor'is ' departure she formed a definite plan of action .
" My dear , " said Anna Mikh'aylovna to her son , " I know from a reliable source that Prince Vas'ili has sent his son to Moscow to get him married to Julie .
I am so fond of Julie that I should be sorry for her .
What do you think of it , my dear ? "
He drove to the Kar'agins ' with the firm intention of proposing .
Julie met him in a gay , careless manner , spoke casually of how she had enjoyed yesterday 's ball , and asked when he was leaving .
Julie was offended and replied that it was true that a woman needs variety , and the same thing over and over again would weary anyone .
" Then I should advise you ... "
He checked himself in the middle of the sentence , lowered his eyes to avoid seeing her unpleasantly irritated and irresolute face , and said :
" I did not come here at all to quarrel with you .
On the contrary ... "
He glanced at her to make sure that he might go on .
Her irritability had suddenly quite vanished , and her anxious , imploring eyes were fixed on him with greedy expectation .
" I can always arrange so as not to see her often , " thought Bor'is .
" The affair has been begun and must be finished ! "
He blushed hotly , raised his eyes to hers , and said :
" You know my feelings for you ! "
She knew that for the P'enza estates and Nizheg'orod forests she could demand this , and she received what she demanded .
The affianced couple , no longer alluding to trees that shed gloom and melancholy upon them , planned the arrangements of a splendid house in Petersburg , paid calls , and prepared everything for a brilliant wedding .
CHAPTER VI
At the end of January old Count Rost'ov went to Moscow with Nat'asha and S'onya .
The countess was still unwell and unable to travel but it was impossible to wait for her recovery .
Late one evening the Rost'ovs ' four sleighs drove into M'arya Dm'itrievna 's courtyard in the old Kony'usheny street .
M'arya Dm'itrievna lived alone .
She had already married off her daughter , and her sons were all in the service .
On ordinary days , after dressing , she received petitioners of various classes , of whom there were always some .
She rarely made an exception and went out to pay visits , and then only to the most important persons in the town .
She had not yet gone to bed when the Rost'ovs arrived and the pulley of the hall door squeaked from the cold as it let in the Rost'ovs and their servants .
M'arya Dm'itrievna , with her spectacles hanging down on her nose and her head flung back , stood in the hall doorway looking with a stern , grim face at the new arrivals .
" The count 's things ?
Bring them here , " she said , pointing to the portmanteaus and not greeting anyone . "
The young ladies ' ?
There to the left .
Now what are you dawdling for ?
" she cried to the maids . "
Get the samovar ready ! ...
You 've grown plumper and prettier , " she remarked , drawing Nat'asha ( whose cheeks were glowing from the cold ) to her by the hood . "
Foo !
You are cold !
Now take off your things , quick ! "
she shouted to the count who was going to kiss her hand .
" You 're half frozen , I 'm sure !
Bring some rum for tea ! ...
Bonjour , S'onya dear !
" she added , turning to S'onya and indicating by this French greeting her slightly contemptuous though affectionate attitude toward her .
When they came in to tea , having taken off their outdoor things and tidied themselves up after their journey , M'arya Dm'itrievna kissed them all in due order .
" I 'm heartily glad you have come and are staying with me .
It was high time , " she said , giving Nat'asha a significant look . "
The old man is here and his son 's expected any day .
You 'll have to make his acquaintance .
But we 'll speak of that later on , " she added , glancing at S'onya with a look that showed she did not want to speak of it in her presence . "
Now listen , " she said to the count .
" What do you want tomorrow ?
Whom will you send for ?
Shinsh'in ?
" she crooked one of her fingers . "
The sniveling Anna Mikh'aylovna ?
That 's two .
She 's here with her son .
The son is getting married !
Then Bez'ukhov , eh ?
He is here too , with his wife .
He ran away from her and she came galloping after him .
He dined with me on Wednesday .
As for them "- and she pointed to the girls-"tomorrow
I 'll take them first to the Iberian shrine of the Mother of God , and then we 'll drive to the Super - Rogue 's .
I suppose you 'll have everything new .
Do n't judge by me : sleeves nowadays are this size !
The other day young Princess Ir'ina Vas'ilevna came to see me ; she was an awful sight - looked as if she had put two barrels on her arms .
You know not a day passes now without some new fashion ....
And what have you to do yourself ?
" she asked the count sternly .
" One thing has come on top of another : her rags to buy , and now a purchaser has turned up for the Moscow estate and for the house .
If you will be so kind , I 'll fix a time and go down to the estate just for a day , and leave my lassies with you . "
" All right .
All right .
They 'll be safe with me , as safe as in Chancery !
M'arya Dm'itrievna ordered almost the whole trousseau .
When they got home she turned everybody out of the room except Nat'asha , and then called her pet to her armchair .
" Well , now we 'll talk .
I congratulate you on your betrothed .
You 've hooked a fine fellow !
I am glad for your sake and I 've known him since he was so high . "
She held her hand a couple of feet from the ground .
Nat'asha blushed happily .
" I like him and all his family .
Now listen !
You know that old Prince Nicholas much dislikes his son 's marrying .
The old fellow 's crotchety !
Of course Prince Andrew is not a child and can shift without him , but it 's not nice to enter a family against a father 's will .
One wants to do it peacefully and lovingly .
You 're a clever girl and you 'll know how to manage .
Be kind , and use your wits .
Then all will be well . "
She loved and knew Prince Andrew , he loved her only , and was to come one of these days and take her .
She wanted nothing more .
" You see I have known him a long time and am also fond of Mary , your future sister - in - law . '
Husbands ' sisters bring up blisters , ' but this one would n't hurt a fly .
She has asked me to bring you two together .
Tomorrow you 'll go with your father to see her .
Be very nice and affectionate to her : you 're younger than she .
When he comes , he 'll find you already know his sister and father and are liked by them .
Am I right or not ?
Wo n't that be best ? "
" Yes , it will , " Nat'asha answered reluctantly .
CHAPTER VII
Next day , by M'arya Dm'itrievna 's advice , Count Rost'ov took Nat'asha to call on Prince Nicholas Bolk'onski .
The count did not set out cheerfully on this visit , at heart he felt afraid .
Nat'asha , on the other hand , having put on her best gown , was in the highest spirits .
" They ca n't help liking me , " she thought .
They drove up to the gloomy old house on the Vozdv'izhenka and entered the vestibule .
When they had been announced a perturbation was noticeable among the servants .
The footman who had gone to announce them was stopped by another in the large hall and they whispered to one another .
Then a maidservant ran into the hall and hurriedly said something , mentioning the princess .
At last an old , cross looking footman came and announced to the Rost'ovs that the prince was not receiving , but that the princess begged them to walk up .
The first person who came to meet the visitors was Mademoiselle Bourienne .
She greeted the father and daughter with special politeness and showed them to the princess ' room .
The princess , looking excited and nervous , her face flushed in patches , ran in to meet the visitors , treading heavily , and vainly trying to appear cordial and at ease .
From the first glance Princess Mary did not like Nat'asha .
She thought her too fashionably dressed , frivolously gay and vain .
She had decided to receive them , but feared lest the prince might at any moment indulge in some freak , as he seemed much upset by the Rost'ovs ' visit .
" There , my dear princess , I 've brought you my songstress , " said the count , bowing and looking round uneasily as if afraid the old prince might appear .
He did not mention this to his daughter , but Nat'asha noticed her father 's nervousness and anxiety and felt mortified by it .
She blushed for him , grew still angrier at having blushed , and looked at the princess with a bold and defiant expression which said that she was not afraid of anybody .
The princess told the count that she would be delighted , and only begged him to stay longer at Anna Sem"enovna 's , and he departed .
Despite the uneasy glances thrown at her by Princess Mary - who wished to have a t^ete-`a - t^ete with Nat'asha - Mademoiselle Bourienne remained in the room and persistently talked about Moscow amusements and theaters .
She did not like Princess Mary , whom she thought very plain , affected , and dry .
Nat'asha suddenly shrank into herself and involuntarily assumed an offhand air which alienated Princess Mary still more .
After five minutes of irksome , constrained conversation , they heard the sound of slippered feet rapidly approaching .
Princess Mary looked frightened .
The door opened and the old prince , in a dressing gown and a white nightcap , came in .
" Ah , madam ! "
he began .
" Madam , Countess ...
Countess Rost'ova , if I am not mistaken ...
I beg you to excuse me , to excuse me ...
I did not know , madam .
God is my witness , I did not know you had honored us with a visit , and I came in such a costume only to see my daughter .
I beg you to excuse me ...
Nor did the latter , having risen and curtsied , know what to do .
Mademoiselle Bourienne alone smiled agreeably .
" I beg you to excuse me , excuse me !
God is my witness , I did not know , " muttered the old man , and after looking Nat'asha over from head to foot he went out .
Mademoiselle Bourienne was the first to recover herself after this apparition and began speaking about the prince 's indisposition .
Nat'asha and Princess Mary looked at one another in silence , and the longer they did so without saying what they wanted to say , the greater grew their antipathy to one another .
" I could n't begin talking about him in the presence of that Frenchwoman , " thought Nat'asha .
The same thought was meanwhile tormenting Princess Mary .
When the count was already leaving the room , Princess Mary went up hurriedly to Nat'asha , took her by the hand , and said with a deep sigh :
" Wait , I must ... "
Nat'asha glanced at her ironically without knowing why .
" Dear Natalie , " said Princess Mary , " I want you to know that I am glad my brother has found happiness .... "
She paused , feeling that she was not telling the truth .
Nat'asha noticed this and guessed its reason .
" I think , Princess , it is not convenient to speak of that now , " she said with external dignity and coldness , though she felt the tears choking her .
" What have I said and what have I done ? " thought she , as soon as she was out of the room .
They waited a long time for Nat'asha to come to dinner that day .
She sat in her room crying like a child , blowing her nose and sobbing .
S'onya stood beside her , kissing her hair .
" Nat'asha , what is it about ? " she asked .
" What do they matter to you ?
It will all pass , Nat'asha . "
" But if you only knew how offensive it was ... as if I ... "
" Do n't talk about it , Nat'asha .
It was n't your fault so why should you mind ?
Kiss me , " said S'onya .
Nat'asha raised her head and , kissing her friend on the lips , pressed her wet face against her .
" I ca n't tell you , I do n't know .
No one 's to blame , " said Nat'asha-"It 's my fault .
But it all hurts terribly .
Oh , why does n't he come ? ... "
She came in to dinner with red eyes .
M'arya Dm'itrievna , who knew how the prince had received the Rost'ovs , pretended not to notice how upset Nat'asha was and jested resolutely and loudly at table with the count and the other guests .
CHAPTER VIII
That evening the Rost'ovs went to the Opera , for which M'arya Dm'itrievna had taken a box .
Nat'asha did not want to go , but could not refuse M'arya Dm'itrievna 's kind offer which was intended expressly for her .
" O God , if he were here now I would not behave as I did then , but differently .
And his eyes - how I see those eyes ! "
thought Nat'asha . "
And what do his father and sister matter to me ?
I love him alone , him , him , with that face and those eyes , with his smile , manly and yet childlike ....
No , I had better not think of him ; not think of him but forget him , quite forget him for the present .
I ca n't bear this waiting
and I shall cry in a minute ! "
and she turned away from the glass , making an effort not to cry . "
And how can S'onya love Nicholas so calmly and quietly and wait so long and so patiently ?
" thought she , looking at S'onya , who also came in quite ready , with a fan in her hand . "
No , she 's altogether different .
I ca n't ! "
Having fallen into the line of carriages , the Rost'ovs ' carriage drove up to the theater , its wheels squeaking over the snow .
Nat'asha and S'onya , holding up their dresses , jumped out quickly .
The count got out helped by the footmen , and , passing among men and women who were entering and the program sellers , they all three went along the corridor to the first row of boxes .
Through the closed doors the music was already audible .
" Nat'asha , your hair !
... " whispered S'onya .
An attendant deferentially and quickly slipped before the ladies and opened the door of their box .
The music sounded louder and through the door rows of brightly lit boxes in which ladies sat with bare arms and shoulders , and noisy stalls brilliant with uniforms , glittered before their eyes .
A lady entering the next box shot a glance of feminine envy at Nat'asha .
The curtain had not yet risen and the overture was being played .
Nat'asha , smoothing her gown , went in with S'onya and sat down , scanning the brilliant tiers of boxes opposite .
The two remarkably pretty girls , Nat'asha and S'onya , with Count Rost'ov who had not been seen in Moscow for a long time , attracted general attention .
Nat'asha 's looks , as everyone told her , had improved in the country , and that evening thanks to her agitation she was particularly pretty .
She struck those who saw her by her fullness of life and beauty , combined with her indifference to everything about her .
Look , there 's Al'enina , " said S'onya , " with her mother , is n't it ? "
" Dear me , Michael Kir'ilovich has grown still stouter ! " remarked the count .
" Look at our Anna Mikh'aylovna - what a headdress she has on ! "
" The Kar'agins , Julie - and Bor'is with them .
One can see at once that they 're engaged .... "
" Drubetsk'oy has proposed ? "
" Oh yes , I heard it today , " said Shinsh'in , coming into the Rost'ovs ' box .
Behind them , wearing a smile and leaning over with an ear to Julie 's mouth , was Bor'is ' handsome smoothly brushed head .
He looked at the Rost'ovs from under his brows and said something , smiling , to his betrothed .
" They are talking about us , about me and him ! " thought Nat'asha . "
And he no doubt is calming her jealousy of me .
They need n't trouble themselves !
If only they knew how little I am concerned about any of them . "
Behind them sat Anna Mikh'aylovna wearing a green headdress and with a happy look of resignation to the will of God on her face .
Their box was pervaded by that atmosphere of an affianced couple which Nat'asha knew so well and liked so much .
She turned away and suddenly remembered all that had been so humiliating in her morning 's visit .
" What right has he not to wish to receive me into his family ?
Oh , better not think of it - not till he comes back ! "
she told herself , and began looking at the faces , some strange and some familiar , in the stalls .
In the front , in the very center , leaning back against the orchestra rail , stood D'olokhov in a Persian dress , his curly hair brushed up into a huge shock .
He stood in full view of the audience , well aware that he was attracting everyone 's attention , yet as much at ease as though he were in his own room .
Around him thronged Moscow 's most brilliant young men , whom he evidently dominated .
The count , laughing , nudged the blushing S'onya and pointed to her former adorer .
" Do you recognize him ? " said he . "
And where has he sprung from ?
" he asked , turning to Shinsh'in . "
Did n't he vanish somewhere ? "
" He did , " replied Shinsh'in .
" He was in the Caucasus and ran away from there .
They say he has been acting as minister to some ruling prince in Persia , where he killed the Shah 's brother .
Now all the Moscow ladies are mad about him !
It 's ' D'olokhov the Persian ' that does it !
We never hear a word but D'olokhov is mentioned .
They swear by him , they offer him to you as they would a dish of choice sterlet .
D'olokhov and Anatole Kur'agin have turned all our ladies ' heads . "
Nat'asha involuntarily gazed at that neck , those shoulders , and pearls and coiffure , and admired the beauty of the shoulders and the pearls .
While Nat'asha was fixing her gaze on her for the second time the lady looked round and , meeting the count 's eyes , nodded to him and smiled .
She was the Countess Bez'ukhova , Pierre 's wife , and the count , who knew everyone in society , leaned over and spoke to her .
" Have you been here long , Countess ?
" he inquired .
" I 'll call , I 'll call to kiss your hand .
I 'm here on business and have brought my girls with me .
They say Sem"enova acts marvelously .
Count Pierre never used to forget us .
Is he here ? "
" Yes , he meant to look in , " answered H'el`ene , and glanced attentively at Nat'asha .
Count Rost'ov resumed his seat .
" Handsome , is n't she ? " he whispered to Nat'asha .
" Wonderful ! " answered Nat'asha .
" She 's a woman one could easily fall in love with . "
Just then the last chords of the overture were heard and the conductor tapped with his stick .
Some latecomers took their seats in the stalls , and the curtain rose .
Nat'asha too began to look at it .
CHAPTER IX
The floor of the stage consisted of smooth boards , at the sides was some painted cardboard representing trees , and at the back was a cloth stretched over boards .
In the center of the stage sat some girls in red bodices and white skirts .
One very fat girl in a white silk dress sat apart on a low bench , to the back of which a piece of green cardboard was glued .
They all sang something .
They sang together and everyone in the theater began clapping and shouting , while the man and woman on the stage - who represented lovers - began smiling , spreading out their arms , and bowing .
After her life in the country , and in her present serious mood , all this seemed grotesque and amazing to Nat'asha .
She could not follow the opera nor even listen to the music ; she saw only the painted cardboard and the queerly dressed men and women who moved , spoke , and sang so strangely in that brilliant light .
She knew what it was all meant to represent , but it was so pretentiously false and unnatural that she first felt ashamed for the actors and then amused at them .
" I suppose it has to be like this ! " she thought .
And feeling the bright light that flooded the whole place and the warm air heated by the crowd , Nat'asha little by little began to pass into a state of intoxication
she had not experienced for a long while .
She did not realize who and where she was , nor what was going on before her .
At a moment when all was quiet before the commencement of a song , a door leading to the stalls on the side nearest the Rost'ovs ' box creaked , and the steps of a belated arrival were heard .
" There 's Kur'agin !
" whispered Shinsh'in .
Countess Bez'ukhova turned smiling to the newcomer , and Nat'asha , following the direction of that look , saw an exceptionally handsome adjutant approaching their box with a self - assured yet courteous bearing .
This was Anatole Kur'agin whom she had seen and noticed long ago at the ball in Petersburg .
He was now in an adjutant 's uniform with one epaulet and a shoulder knot .
He moved with a restrained swagger which would have been ridiculous had he not been so good - looking and had his handsome face not worn such an expression of good - humored complacency and gaiety .
Though the performance was proceeding , he walked deliberately down the carpeted gangway , his sword and spurs slightly jingling and his handsome perfumed head held high .
Having looked at Nat'asha he approached his sister , laid his well gloved hand on the edge of her box , nodded to her , and leaning forward asked a question , with a motion toward Nat'asha .
" Mais charmante ! " said he , evidently referring to Nat'asha , who did not exactly hear his words but understood them from the movement of his lips .
Then he took his place in the first row of the stalls and sat down beside D'olokhov , nudging with his elbow in a friendly and offhand way that D'olokhov whom others treated so fawningly .
He winked at him gaily , smiled , and rested his foot against the orchestra screen .
" How like the brother is to the sister , " remarked the count . "
And how handsome they both are ! "
Shinsh'in , lowering his voice , began to tell the count of some intrigue of Kur'agin 's in Moscow , and Nat'asha tried to overhear it just because he had said she was " charmante . "
The first act was over .
In the stalls everyone began moving about , going out and coming in .
Nat'asha with a gay , coquettish smile talked to him , and congratulated on his approaching wedding that same Bor'is with whom she had formerly been in love .
In the state of intoxication she was in , everything seemed simple and natural .
The scantily clad H'el`ene smiled at everyone in the same way , and Nat'asha gave Bor'is a similar smile .
H'el`ene 's box was filled and surrounded from the stalls by the most distinguished and intellectual men , who seemed to vie with one another in their wish to let everyone see that they knew her .
During the whole of that entr'acte Kur'agin stood with D'olokhov in front of the orchestra partition , looking at the Rost'ovs ' box .
Nat'asha knew he was talking about her and this afforded her pleasure .
She even turned so that he should see her profile in what she thought was its most becoming aspect .
Before the beginning of the second act Pierre appeared in the stalls .
The Rost'ovs had not seen him since their arrival .
His face looked sad , and he had grown still stouter since Nat'asha last saw him .
He passed up to the front rows , not noticing anyone .
Anatole went up to him and began speaking to him , looking at and indicating the Rost'ovs ' box .
On seeing Nat'asha Pierre grew animated and , hastily passing between the rows , came toward their box .
When he got there he leaned on his elbows and , smiling , talked to her for a long time .
While conversing with Pierre , Nat'asha heard a man 's voice in Countess Bez'ukhova 's box and something told her it was Kur'agin .
She turned and their eyes met .
They began waving their arms .
Then some other people ran in and began dragging away the maiden who had been in white and was now in light blue .
All these things were repeatedly interrupted by the enthusiastic shouts of the audience .
During this act every time Nat'asha looked toward the stalls she saw Anatole Kur'agin with an arm thrown across the back of his chair , staring at her .
She was pleased to see that he was captivated by her and it did not occur to her that there was anything wrong in it .
" Do make me acquainted with your charming daughters , " said she .
" The whole town is singing their praises and I do n't even know them ! "
Nat'asha rose and curtsied to the splendid countess .
She was so pleased by praise from this brilliant beauty that she blushed with pleasure .
" I want to become a Moscovite too , now , " said H'el`ene .
" How is it you 're not ashamed to bury such pearls in the country ? "
Countess Bez'ukhova quite deserved her reputation of being a fascinating woman .
She could say what she did not think -
especially what was flattering - quite simply and naturally .
" Dear count , you must let me look after your daughters !
Though I am not staying here long this time - nor are you - I will try to amuse them .
I have already heard much of you in Petersburg and wanted to get to know you , " said she to Nat'asha with her stereotyped and lovely smile .
" I had heard about you from my page , Drubetsk'oy .
Have you heard he is getting married ?
And also from my husband 's friend Bolk'onski , Prince Andrew Bolk'onski , " she went on with special emphasis , implying that she knew of his relation to Nat'asha .
To get better acquainted she asked that one of the young ladies should come into her box for the rest of the performance , and Nat'asha moved over to it .
The scene of the third act represented a palace in which many candles were burning and pictures of knights with short beards hung on the walls .
In the middle stood what were probably a king and a queen .
The king waved his right arm and , evidently nervous , sang something badly and sat down on a crimson throne .
The maiden who had been first in white and then in light blue , now wore only a smock , and stood beside the throne with her hair down .
She sang something mournfully , addressing the queen , but the king waved his arm severely , and men and women with bare legs came in from both sides and began dancing all together .
In the stalls everyone clapped and shouted " bravo ! "
Then one of the men went into a corner of the stage .
The cymbals and horns in the orchestra struck up more loudly , and this man with bare legs jumped very high and waved his feet about very rapidly .
( He was Duport , who received sixty thousand rubles a year for this art . )
Everybody in the stalls , boxes , and galleries began clapping and shouting with all their might , and the man stopped and began smiling and bowing to all sides .
Then other men and women danced with bare legs .
Then the king again shouted to the sound of music , and they all began singing .
But suddenly a storm came on , chromatic scales and diminished sevenths were heard in the orchestra , everyone ran off , again dragging one of their number away , and the curtain dropped .
Once more there was a terrible noise and clatter among the audience , and with rapturous faces everyone began shouting : " Duport !
Duport !
Duport ! "
Nat'asha no longer thought this strange .
She looked about with pleasure , smiling joyfully .
" Is n't Duport delightful ? "
H'el`ene asked her .
" Oh , yes , " replied Nat'asha .
CHAPTER X
During the entr'acte a whiff of cold air came into H'el`ene 's box , the door opened , and Anatole entered , stooping and trying not to brush against anyone .
" Let me introduce my brother to you , " said H'el`ene , her eyes shifting uneasily from Nat'asha to Anatole .
Nat'asha turned her pretty little head toward the elegant young officer and smiled at him over her bare shoulder .
Kur'agin was much more sensible and simple with women than among men .
Kur'agin asked her opinion of the performance and told her how at a previous performance Sem"enova had fallen down on the stage .
" And do you know , Countess , " he said , suddenly addressing her as an old , familiar acquaintance , " we are getting up a costume tournament ; you ought to take part in it !
It will be great fun .
We shall all meet at the Kar'agins ' !
Please come !
No !
Really , eh ? " said he .
While saying this he never removed his smiling eyes from her face , her neck , and her bare arms .
Nat'asha knew for certain that he was enraptured by her .
This pleased her , yet his presence made her feel constrained and oppressed .
When she was not looking at him she felt that he was looking at her shoulders , and she involuntarily caught his eye so that he should look into hers rather than this .
But looking into his eyes she was frightened , realizing that there was not that barrier of modesty she had always felt between herself and other men .
She did not know how it was that within five minutes she had come to feel herself terribly near to this man .
When she turned away she feared he might seize her from behind by her bare arm and kiss her on the neck .
They spoke of most ordinary things , yet she felt that they were closer to one another than she had ever been to any man .
Well , I 'm glad of it ! "
During one of these moments of awkward silence when Anatole 's prominent eyes were gazing calmly and fixedly at her , Nat'asha , to break the silence , asked him how he liked Moscow .
She asked the question and blushed .
She felt all the time that by talking to him she was doing something improper .
Anatole smiled as though to encourage her .
" At first I did not like it much , because what makes a town pleasant ce sont les jolies femmes , * is n't that so ?
But now I like it very much indeed , " he said , looking at her significantly .
" You 'll come to the costume tournament , Countess ?
Do come ! " and putting out his hand to her bouquet and dropping his voice , he added , " You will be the prettiest there .
Do come , dear countess , and give me this flower as a pledge ! "
* Are the pretty women .
Nat'asha did not understand what he was saying any more than he did himself , but she felt that his incomprehensible words had an improper intention .
She did not know what to say and turned away as if she had not heard his remark .
But as soon as she had turned away she felt that he was there , behind , so close behind her .
" How is he now ?
Confused ?
Angry ?
Ought I to put it right ?
" she asked herself , and she could not refrain from turning round .
She looked straight into his eyes , and his nearness , self - assurance , and the good - natured tenderness of his smile vanquished her .
She smiled just as he was doing , gazing straight into his eyes .
And again she felt with horror that no barrier lay between him and her .
The curtain rose again .
Anatole left the box , serene and gay .
Nat'asha went back to her father in the other box , now quite submissive to the world she found herself in .
In the fourth act there was some sort of devil who sang waving his arm about , till the boards were withdrawn from under him and he disappeared down below .
That was the only part of the fourth act that Nat'asha saw .
She felt agitated and tormented , and the cause of this was Kur'agin whom she could not help watching .
As they were leaving the theater Anatole came up to them , called their carriage , and helped them in .
As he was putting Nat'asha in he pressed her arm above the elbow .
Agitated and flushed she turned round .
He was looking at her with glittering eyes , smiling tenderly .
" O God !
I am lost !
" she said to herself . "
How could I let him ? "
She sat for a long time hiding her flushed face in her hands trying to realize what had happened to her , but was unable either to understand what had happened or what she felt .
Everything seemed dark , obscure , and terrible .
H'el`ene
it had all seemed clear and simple ; but now , alone by herself , it was incomprehensible .
" What is it ?
What was that terror
I felt of him ?
What is this gnawing of conscience
I am feeling now ?
" she thought .
Only to the old countess at night in bed could Nat'asha have told all she was feeling .
She knew that S'onya with her severe and simple views would either not understand it at all or would be horrified at such a confession .
So Nat'asha tried to solve what was torturing her by herself .
" Am I spoiled for Andrew 's love or not ? " she asked herself , and with soothing irony replied : " What a fool I am to ask that !
What did happen to me ?
Nothing !
I have done nothing , I did n't lead him on at all .
Nobody will know and I shall never see him again , " she told herself . "
So it is plain that nothing has happened and there is nothing to repent of , and Andrew can love me still .
But why ' still ? '
O God , why is n't he here ?
" Nat'asha quieted herself for a moment , but again some instinct told her that though all this was true , and though nothing had happened , yet the former purity of her love for Prince Andrew had perished .
And again in imagination she went over her whole conversation with Kur'agin , and again saw the face , gestures , and tender smile of that bold handsome man when he pressed her arm .
CHAPTER XI
He indicated to him Princess Mary and Julie Kar'agina .
Anatole consented and went to Moscow , where he put up at Pierre 's house .
Pierre received him unwillingly at first , but got used to him after a while , sometimes even accompanied him on his carousals , and gave him money under the guise of loans .
He had never missed a carousal at Dan'ilov 's or other Moscow revelers ' , drank whole nights through , outvying everyone else , and was at all the balls and parties of the best society .
There was talk of his intrigues with some of the ladies , and he flirted with a few of them at the balls .
But he did not run after the unmarried girls , especially the rich heiresses who were most of them plain .
There was a special reason for this , as he had got married two years before - a fact known only to his most intimate friends .
At that time while with his regiment in Poland , a Polish landowner of small means had forced him to marry his daughter .
Anatole had very soon abandoned his wife and , for a payment which he agreed to send to his father - in - law , had arranged to be free to pass himself off as a bachelor .
Anatole was always content with his position , with himself , and with others .
He was instinctively and thoroughly convinced that it was impossible for him to live otherwise than as he did and that he had never in his life done anything base .
He was incapable of considering how his actions might affect others or what the consequences of this or that action of his might be .
He was not a gambler , at any rate he did not care about winning .
He was not vain .
He did not mind what people thought of him .
Still less could he be accused of ambition .
More than once he had vexed his father by spoiling his own career , and he laughed at distinctions of all kinds .
He was not mean , and did not refuse anyone who asked of him .
Rakes , those male Magdalenes , have a secret feeling of innocence similar to that which female Magdalenes have , based on the same hope of forgiveness .
" All will be forgiven her , for she loved much ; and all will be forgiven him , for he enjoyed much . "
Anatole was sincerely fond of D'olokhov for his cleverness and audacity .
D'olokhov , who needed
Anatole Kur'agin 's name , position , and connections as a bait to draw rich young men into his gambling set , made use of him and amused himself at his expense without letting the other feel it .
Apart from the advantage he derived from Anatole , the very process of dominating another 's will was in itself a pleasure , a habit , and a necessity to D'olokhov .
Nat'asha had made a strong impression on Kur'agin .
At supper after the opera he described to D'olokhov with the air of a connoisseur the attractions of her arms , shoulders , feet , and hair and expressed his intention of making love to her .
Anatole had no notion and was incapable of considering what might come of such love - making , as he never had any notion of the outcome of any of his actions .
" She 's first - rate , my dear fellow , but not for us , " replied D'olokhov .
" I will tell my sister to ask her to dinner , " said Anatole .
"
Eh ? "
" You 'd better wait till she 's married .... "
" You know , I adore little girls , they lose their heads at once , " pursued Anatole .
" You have been caught once already by a ' little girl , ' " said D'olokhov who knew of Kur'agin 's marriage .
"
Take care ! "
" Well , that ca n't happen twice !
Eh ? " said Anatole , with a good - humored laugh .
CHAPTER XII
The day after the opera the Rost'ovs went nowhere and nobody came to see them .
M'arya Dm'itrievna talked to the count about something which they concealed from Nat'asha .
Nat'asha guessed they were talking about the old prince and planning something , and this disquieted and offended her .
She was expecting Prince Andrew any moment and twice that day sent a manservant to the Vozdv'izhenka to ascertain whether he had come .
He had not arrived .
She suffered more now than during her first days in Moscow .
To her impatience and pining for him were now added the unpleasant recollection of her interview with Princess Mary and the old prince , and a fear and anxiety of which she did not understand the cause .
She continually fancied that either he would never come or that something would happen to her before he came .
She could no longer think of him by herself calmly and continuously as she had done before .
As soon as she began to think of him , the recollection of the old prince , of Princess Mary , of the theater , and of Kur'agin mingled with her thoughts .
To the family Nat'asha seemed livelier than usual , but she was far less tranquil and happy than before .
On Sunday morning M'arya Dm'itrievna invited her visitors to Mass at her parish church - the Church of the Assumption built over the graves of victims of the plague .
" I do n't like those fashionable churches , " she said , evidently priding herself on her independence of thought .
" God is the same everywhere .
We have an excellent priest , he conducts the service decently and with dignity , and the deacon is the same .
What holiness is there in giving concerts in the choir ?
I do n't like it
, it 's just self - indulgence ! "
M'arya Dm'itrievna liked Sundays and knew how to keep them .
Her whole house was scrubbed and cleaned on Saturdays ; neither she nor the servants worked , and they all wore holiday dress and went to church .
At her table there were extra dishes at dinner , and the servants had vodka and roast goose or suckling pig .
But in nothing in the house was the holiday so noticeable as in M'arya Dm'itrievna 's broad , stern face , which on that day wore an invariable look of solemn festivity .
She wore her holiday shawl , in which she paid calls , and announced that she was going to see Prince Nicholas Bolk'onski to have an explanation with him about Nat'asha .
It was H'el`ene .
Nat'asha had not time to take off the bodice before the door opened and Countess Bez'ukhova , dressed in a purple velvet gown with a high collar , came into the room beaming with good - humored amiable smiles .
" Oh , my enchantress ! "
she cried to the blushing Nat'asha . "
Charming !
No , this is really beyond anything , my dear count , " said she to Count Rost'ov who had followed her in .
" How can you live in Moscow and go nowhere ?
No , I wo n't let you off !
Mademoiselle George will recite at my house tonight and there 'll be some people , and if you do n't bring your lovely girls - who are prettier than Mademoiselle George - I wo n't know you !
My husband is away in Tver or I would send him to fetch you .
You must come .
You positively must !
Between eight and nine . "
She nodded to the dressmaker , whom she knew and who had curtsied respectfully to her , and seated herself in an armchair beside the looking glass , draping the folds of her velvet dress picturesquely .
She did not cease chattering good - naturedly and gaily , continually praising Nat'asha 's beauty .
" But anything suits you , my charmer ! " she remarked .
A smile of pleasure never left Nat'asha 's face .
She felt happy and as if she were blossoming under the praise of this dear Countess Bez'ukhova who had formerly seemed to her so unapproachable and important and was now so kind to her .
Nat'asha brightened up and felt almost in love with this woman , who was so beautiful and so kind .
H'el`ene for her part was sincerely delighted with Nat'asha and wished to give her a good time .
Anatole had asked her to bring him and Nat'asha together , and she was calling on the Rost'ovs for that purpose .
The idea of throwing her brother and Nat'asha together amused her .
Though at one time , in Petersburg , she had been annoyed with Nat'asha for drawing Bor'is away , she did not think of that now , and in her own way heartily wished Nat'asha well .
As she was leaving the Rost'ovs she called her prot'eg'ee aside .
" My brother dined with me yesterday - we nearly died of laughter - he ate nothing and kept sighing for you , my charmer !
He is madly , quite madly , in love with you , my dear . "
Nat'asha blushed scarlet when she heard this .
" How she blushes , how she blushes , my pretty ! " said H'el`ene .
" You must certainly come .
If you love somebody , my charmer , that is not a reason to shut yourself up .
Even if you are engaged , I am sure your fianc'e would wish you to go into society rather than be bored to death . "
" So she knows I am engaged , and she and her husband Pierre -
that good Pierre - have talked and laughed about this .
So it 's all right . "
And again , under H'el`ene 's influence , what had seemed terrible now seemed simple and natural . "
And she is such a grande dame , so kind , and evidently likes me so much .
And why not enjoy myself ?
" thought Nat'asha , gazing at H'el`ene with wide - open , wondering eyes .
M'arya Dm'itrievna came back to dinner taciturn and serious , having evidently suffered a defeat at the old prince 's .
She was still too agitated by the encounter to be able to talk of the affair calmly .
In answer to the count 's inquiries she replied that things were all right and that she would tell about it next day .
On hearing of Countess Bez'ukhova 's visit and the invitation for that evening , M'arya Dm'itrievna remarked :
" I do n't care to have anything to do with Bez'ukhova and do n't advise you to ; however , if you 've promised - go .
It will divert your thoughts , " she added , addressing Nat'asha .
CHAPTER XIII
Count Rost'ov took the girls to Countess Bez'ukhova 's .
There were a good many people there , but nearly all strangers to Nat'asha .
Count Rost'ov was displeased to see that the company consisted almost entirely of men and women known for the freedom of their conduct .
Mademoiselle George was standing in a corner of the drawing room surrounded by young men .
There were several Frenchmen present , among them M'etivier who from the time H'el`ene reached Moscow had been an intimate in her house .
The count decided not to sit down to cards or let his girls out of his sight and to get away as soon as Mademoiselle
George 's performance was over .
Anatole was at the door , evidently on the lookout for the Rost'ovs .
Immediately after greeting the count he went up to Nat'asha and followed her .
As soon as she saw him she was seized by the same feeling she had had at the opera - gratified vanity at his admiration of her and fear at the absence of a moral barrier between them .
H'el`ene welcomed Nat'asha delightedly and was loud in admiration of her beauty and her dress .
Soon after their arrival Mademoiselle George went out of the room to change her costume .
In the drawing room people began arranging the chairs and taking their seats .
Anatole moved a chair for Nat'asha and was about to sit down beside her , but the count , who never lost sight of her , took the seat himself .
Anatole sat down behind her .
Mademoiselle George , with her bare , fat , dimpled arms , and a red shawl draped over one shoulder , came into the space left vacant for her , and assumed an unnatural pose .
Enthusiastic whispering was audible .
Mademoiselle George looked sternly and gloomily at the audience and began reciting some French verses describing her guilty love for her son .
In some places she raised her voice , in others she whispered , lifting her head triumphantly ; sometimes she paused and uttered hoarse sounds , rolling her eyes .
" Adorable ! divine ! delicious ! " was heard from every side .
Nat'asha looked at the fat actress , but neither saw nor heard nor understood anything of what went on before her .
She only felt herself again completely borne away into this strange senseless world - so remote from her old world - a world in which it was impossible to know what was good or bad , reasonable or senseless .
Behind her sat Anatole , and conscious of his proximity she experienced a frightened sense of expectancy .
After the first monologue the whole company rose and surrounded Mademoiselle George , expressing their enthusiasm .
" How beautiful she is ! "
Nat'asha remarked to her father who had also risen and was moving through the crowd toward the actress .
" I do n't think so when I look at you ! " said Anatole , following Nat'asha .
He said this at a moment when she alone could hear him .
" You are enchanting ... from the moment I saw you
I have never ceased ... "
" Come , come , Nat'asha ! " said the count , as he turned back for his daughter .
" How beautiful she is ! "
Nat'asha without saying anything stepped up to her father and looked at him with surprised inquiring eyes .
After giving several recitations , Mademoiselle George left , and Countess Bez'ukhova asked her visitors into the ballroom .
The count wished to go home , but H'el`ene entreated him not to spoil her improvised ball , and the Rost'ovs stayed on .
Anatole asked Nat'asha for a valse and as they danced he pressed her waist and hand and told her she was bewitching and that he loved her .
During the ' ecossaise , which she also danced with him , Anatole said nothing when they happened to be by themselves , but merely gazed at her .
Nat'asha lifted her frightened eyes to him , but there was such confident tenderness in his affectionate look and smile that she could not , whilst looking at him , say what she had to say .
She lowered her eyes .
" Do n't say such things to me .
I am betrothed and love another , " she said rapidly ....
She glanced at him .
Anatole was not upset or pained by what she had said .
" Do n't speak to me of that !
What can I do ? " said he .
" I tell you I am madly , madly , in love with you !
Is it my fault that you are enchanting ? ...
It 's our turn to begin . "
Nat'asha , animated and excited , looked about her with wide - open frightened eyes and seemed merrier than usual .
She understood hardly anything that went on that evening .
They danced the ' ecossaise and the Grossvater .
Her father asked her to come home , but she begged to remain .
Wherever she went and whomever she was speaking to , she felt his eyes upon her .
H'el`ene had disappeared leaving them alone , and Anatole had taken her hand and said in a tender voice :
" I can not come to visit you but is it possible that I shall never see you ?
I love you madly .
Can I never ... ? "
and , blocking her path , he brought his face close to hers .
His large , glittering , masculine eyes were so close to hers that she saw nothing but them .
" Natalie ? "
he whispered inquiringly while she felt her hands being painfully pressed . "
Natalie ? "
" I do n't understand .
I have nothing to say , " her eyes replied .
Burning lips were pressed to hers , and at the same instant she felt herself released , and H'el`ene 's footsteps and the rustle of her dress were heard in the room .
Nat'asha looked round at her , and then , red and trembling , threw a frightened look of inquiry at Anatole and moved toward the door .
" One word , just one , for God 's sake ! " cried Anatole .
She paused .
She so wanted a word from him that would explain to her what had happened and to which she could find no answer .
" Natalie , just a word , only one ! " he kept repeating , evidently not knowing what to say and he repeated it till H'el`ene came up to them .
H'el`ene returned with Nat'asha to the drawing room .
The Rost'ovs went away without staying for supper .
After reaching home Nat'asha did not sleep all night .
She was tormented by the insoluble question whether she loved Anatole or Prince Andrew .
She loved Prince Andrew - she remembered distinctly how deeply she loved him .
But she also loved Anatole , of that there was no doubt . "
Else how could all this have happened ?
" thought she .
" If , after that , I could return his smile when saying good - by , if I was able to let it come to that , it means that I loved him from the first .
It means that he is kind , noble , and splendid , and I could not help loving him .
What am I to do if I love him and the other one too ? "
she asked herself , unable to find an answer to these terrible questions .
CHAPTER XIV
Morning came with its cares and bustle .
Everyone got up and began to move about and talk , dressmakers came again .
M'arya Dm'itrievna appeared , and they were called to breakfast .
Nat'asha kept looking uneasily at everybody with wide - open eyes , as if wishing to intercept every glance directed toward her , and tried to appear the same as usual .
After breakfast , which was her best time , M'arya Dm'itrievna sat down in her armchair and called Nat'asha and the count to her .
" Well , friends , I have now thought the whole matter over and this is my advice , " she began . "
Yesterday , as you know , I went to see Prince Bolk'onski .
Well , I had a talk with him ....
He took it into his head to begin shouting , but I am not one to be shouted down .
I said what I had to say ! "
" Well , and he ? " asked the count .
" He ?
He 's crazy ...
he did not want to listen .
But what 's the use of talking ?
As it is we have worn the poor girl out , " said M'arya Dm'itrievna .
" My advice to you is finish your business and go back home to Otr'adnoe ... and wait there . "
" Oh , no ! " exclaimed Nat'asha .
" Yes , go back , " said M'arya Dm'itrievna , " and wait there .
If your betrothed comes here now - there will be no avoiding a quarrel ; but alone with the old man he will talk things over and then come on to you . "
Count Rost'ov approved of this suggestion , appreciating its reasonableness .
" That is perfectly true .
And I am sorry I went to see him and took her , " said the old count .
" No , why be sorry ?
Being here , you had to pay your respects .
But if he won't - that 's his affair , " said M'arya Dm'itrievna , looking for something in her reticule . "
Besides , the trousseau is ready , so there is nothing to wait for ; and what is not ready I 'll send after you .
Though I do n't like letting you go , it is the best way .
So go , with God 's blessing ! "
Having found what she was looking for in the reticule she handed it to Nat'asha .
It was a letter from Princess Mary .
" She has written to you .
How she torments herself , poor thing !
She 's afraid you might think that she does not like you . "
" But she does n't like me , " said Nat'asha .
" Do n't talk nonsense ! " cried M'arya Dm'itrievna .
" Do n't answer like that , my good girl ! " she said .
" What I say is true !
Write an answer ! "
Nat'asha did not reply and went to her own room to read Princess Mary 's letter .
Princess Mary wrote that she was in despair at the misunderstanding that had occurred between them .
Whatever her father 's feelings might be , she begged Nat'asha to believe that she could not help loving her as the one chosen by her brother , for whose happiness she was ready to sacrifice everything .
" Do not think , however , " she wrote , " that my father is ill - disposed toward you .
He is an invalid and an old man who must be forgiven ; but he is good and magnanimous and will love her who makes his son happy . "
Princess Mary went on to ask Nat'asha to fix a time when she could see her again .
After reading the letter Nat'asha sat down at the writing table to answer it . "
Dear Princess , " she wrote in French quickly and mechanically , and then paused .
What more could she write after all that had happened the evening before ?
"
Yes , yes !
All that has happened , and now all is changed , " she thought as she sat with the letter she had begun before her . "
Must I break off with him ?
Must I really ?
That 's awful ... " and to escape from these dreadful thoughts she went to S'onya and began sorting patterns with her .
After dinner Nat'asha went to her room and again took up Princess Mary 's letter . "
Can it be that it is all over ?
" she thought .
" Can it be that all this has happened so quickly and has destroyed all that went before ? "
She recalled her love for Prince Andrew in all its former strength , and at the same time felt that she loved Kur'agin .
" Why could that not be as well ? " she sometimes asked herself in complete bewilderment .
" Only so could I be completely happy ; but now I have to choose , and I ca n't be happy without either of them .
Only , " she thought , " to tell Prince Andrew what has happened or to hide it from him are both equally impossible .
But with that one nothing is spoiled .
But am I really to abandon forever the joy of Prince Andrew 's love , in which I have lived so long ? "
" Please , Miss ! "
whispered a maid entering the room with a mysterious air . "
A man told me to give you this- " and she handed Nat'asha a letter .
Yes , she loved him , or else how could that have happened which had happened ?
And how could she have a love letter from him in her hand ?
With trembling hands Nat'asha held that passionate love letter which D'olokhov had composed for Anatole , and as she read it she found in it an echo of all that she herself imagined she was feeling .
" Since yesterday evening my fate has been sealed ; to be loved by you or to die .
There is no other way for me , " the letter began .
Love would conquer all .
He would steal her away and carry her off to the ends of the earth .
" Yes , yes ! I love him ! "
thought Nat'asha , reading the letter for the twentieth time and finding some peculiarly deep meaning in each word of it .
That evening M'arya Dm'itrievna was going to the Akh'arovs ' and proposed to take the girls with her .
Nat'asha , pleading a headache , remained at home .
CHAPTER XV
On returning late in the evening S'onya went to Nat'asha 's room , and to her surprise found her still dressed and asleep on the sofa .
Open on the table , beside her lay Anatole 's letter .
S'onya picked it up and read it .
As she read she glanced at the sleeping Nat'asha , trying to find in her face an explanation of what she was reading , but did not find it .
Her face was calm , gentle , and happy .
Clutching her breast to keep herself from choking , S'onya , pale and trembling with fear and agitation , sat down in an armchair and burst into tears .
" How was it I noticed nothing ?
How could it go so far ?
Can she have left off loving Prince Andrew ?
And how could she let Kur'agin go to such lengths ?
He is a deceiver and a villain , that 's plain !
What will Nicholas , dear noble Nicholas , do when he hears of it ?
So this is the meaning of her excited , resolute , unnatural look the day before yesterday , yesterday , and today , " thought S'onya . "
But it ca n't be that she loves him !
She probably opened the letter without knowing who it was from .
Probably she is offended by it .
She could not do such a thing ! "
S'onya wiped away her tears and went up to Nat'asha , again scanning her face .
" Nat'asha ! " she said , just audibly .
Nat'asha awoke and saw S'onya .
" Ah , you 're back ? "
And with the decision and tenderness that often come at the moment of awakening , she embraced her friend , but noticing S'onya 's look of embarrassment , her own face expressed confusion and suspicion .
" S'onya , you 've read that letter ? " she demanded .
" Yes , " answered S'onya softly .
Nat'asha smiled rapturously .
" No , S'onya , I ca n't any longer ! " she said .
" I ca n't hide it from you any longer .
You know , we love one another !
S'onya , darling , he writes ... S'onya ... "
S'onya stared open - eyed at Nat'asha , unable to believe her ears .
" And Bolk'onski ? "
she asked .
" Ah , S'onya , if you only knew how happy I am ! " cried Nat'asha .
" You do n't know what love is .... "
" But , Nat'asha , can that be all over ? "
Nat'asha looked at S'onya with wide - open eyes as if she could not grasp the question .
" Well , then , are you refusing Prince Andrew ? " said S'onya .
" Oh , you do n't understand anything !
Do n't talk nonsense , just listen ! " said Nat'asha , with momentary vexation .
" But I ca n't believe it , " insisted S'onya .
" I do n't understand .
How is it you have loved a man for a whole year and suddenly ...
Why , you have only seen him three times !
Nat'asha
, I do n't believe you , you 're joking !
In three days to forget everything and so ... "
" Three days ? " said Nat'asha .
" It seems to me
I 've loved him a hundred years .
It seems to me that I have never loved anyone before .
You ca n't understand it ....
S'onya , wait a bit , sit here , " and Nat'asha embraced and kissed her .
" I had heard that it happens like this , and you must have heard it too , but it 's only now that I feel such love .
It 's not the same as before .
As soon as I saw him I felt he was my master
and I his slave , and that I could not help loving him .
Yes , his slave !
Whatever he orders I shall do .
You do n't understand that .
What can I do ?
What can I do , S'onya ? "
cried Nat'asha with a happy yet frightened expression .
" But think what you are doing , " cried S'onya .
" I ca n't leave it like this .
This secret correspondence ...
How could you let him go so far ? "
she went on , with a horror and disgust she could hardly conceal .
" I told you that I have no will , " Nat'asha replied .
" Why ca n't you understand ?
I love him ! "
" Then I wo n't let it come to that ...
I shall tell ! "
cried S'onya , bursting into tears .
" What do you mean ?
For God 's sake ...
If you tell , you are my enemy ! "
declared Nat'asha .
" You want me to be miserable , you want us to be separated .... "
When she saw Nat'asha 's fright , S'onya shed tears of shame and pity for her friend .
" But what has happened between you ? "
she asked .
" What has he said to you ?
Why does n't he come to the house ? "
Nat'asha did not answer her questions .
" For God 's sake , S'onya , do n't tell anyone , do n't torture me , " Nat'asha entreated .
" Remember no one ought to interfere in such matters !
I have confided in you .... "
" But why this secrecy ?
Why does n't he come to the house ? " asked S'onya . "
Why does n't he openly ask for your hand ?
You know Prince Andrew gave you complete freedom - if it is really so ; but I do n't believe it !
Nat'asha , have you considered what these secret reasons can be ? "
Nat'asha looked at S'onya with astonishment .
Evidently this question presented itself to her mind for the first time and she did not know how to answer it .
" I do n't know what the reasons are .
But there must be reasons ! "
S'onya sighed and shook her head incredulously .
" If there were reasons ... " she began .
But Nat'asha , guessing her doubts , interrupted her in alarm .
" S'onya , one ca n't doubt him !
One ca n't , one ca n't !
Do n't you understand ?
" she cried .
" Does he love you ? "
" Does he love me ? "
Nat'asha repeated with a smile of pity at her friend 's lack of comprehension . "
Why , you have read his letter and you have seen him . "
" But if he is dishonorable ? "
" He ! dishonorable ?
If you only knew ! " exclaimed Nat'asha .
" If he is an honorable man he should either declare his intentions or cease seeing you ; and if you wo n't do this , I will .
I will write to him , and I will tell Papa ! " said S'onya resolutely .
" But I ca n't live without him ! "
cried Nat'asha .
" Nat'asha , I do n't understand you .
And what are you saying !
Think of your father and of Nicholas . "
" I do n't want anyone , I do n't love anyone but him .
How dare you say he is dishonorable ?
Do n't you know that I love him ? "
screamed Nat'asha . "
Go away , S'onya !
I do n't want to quarrel with you , but go , for God 's sake go !
You see how I am suffering ! "
Nat'asha cried angrily , in a voice of despair and repressed irritation .
S'onya burst into sobs and ran from the room .
Nat'asha went to the table and without a moment 's reflection wrote that answer to Princess Mary which she had been unable to write all the morning .
At that moment this all seemed quite easy , simple , and clear to Nat'asha .
On Friday the Rost'ovs were to return to the country , but on Wednesday the count went with the prospective purchaser to his estate near Moscow .
On the day the count left , S'onya and Nat'asha were invited to a big dinner party at the Kar'agins ' , and M'arya Dm'itrievna took them there .
At that party Nat'asha again met Anatole , and S'onya noticed that she spoke to him , trying not to be overheard , and that all through dinner she was more agitated than ever .
When they got home Nat'asha was the first to begin the explanation S'onya expected .
" There , S'onya , you were talking all sorts of nonsense about him , " Nat'asha began in a mild voice such as children use when they wish to be praised .
" We have had an explanation today . "
" Well , what happened ?
What did he say ?
Nat'asha , how glad I am you 're not angry with me !
Tell me everything - the whole truth .
What did he say ? "
Nat'asha became thoughtful .
" Oh , S'onya , if you knew him as I do !
He said ...
He asked me what I had promised Bolk'onski .
He was glad I was free to refuse him . "
S'onya sighed sorrowfully .
" But you have n't refused Bolk'onski ? " said she .
" Perhaps I have .
Perhaps all is over between me and Bolk'onski .
Why do you think so badly of me ? "
" I do n't think anything , only I do n't understand this ... "
" Wait a bit , S'onya , you 'll understand everything .
You 'll see what a man he is !
Now do n't think badly of me or of him .
I do n't think badly of anyone : I love and pity everybody .
But what am I to do ? "
S'onya did not succumb to the tender tone Nat'asha used toward her .
The more emotional and ingratiating the expression of Nat'asha 's face became , the more serious and stern grew S'onya 's .
" Nat'asha , " said she , " you asked me not to speak to you , and I have n't spoken , but now you yourself have begun .
I do n't trust him , Nat'asha .
Why this secrecy ? "
" Again , again ! " interrupted Nat'asha .
" Nat'asha , I am afraid for you ! "
" Afraid of what ? "
" I am afraid you 're going to your ruin , " said S'onya resolutely , and was herself horrified at what she had said .
Anger again showed in Nat'asha 's face .
" And I 'll go to my ruin , I will , as soon as possible !
It 's not your business !
It wo n't be you , but I , who 'll suffer .
Leave me alone , leave me alone !
I hate you ! "
" Nat'asha ! " moaned S'onya , aghast .
" I hate you , I hate you !
You 're my enemy forever ! "
And Nat'asha ran out of the room .
Nat'asha did not speak to S'onya again and avoided her .
With the same expression of agitated surprise and guilt she went about the house , taking up now one occupation , now another , and at once abandoning them .
Hard as it was for S'onya , she watched her friend and did not let her out of her sight .
S'onya began watching her friend still more attentively and noticed that at dinner and all that evening Nat'asha was in a strange and unnatural state .
She answered questions at random , began sentences she did not finish , and laughed at everything .
After tea S'onya noticed a housemaid at Nat'asha 's door timidly waiting to let her pass .
She let the girl go in , and then listening at the door learned that another letter had been delivered .
Then suddenly it became clear to S'onya that Nat'asha had some dreadful plan for that evening .
S'onya knocked at her door .
Nat'asha did not let her in .
" She will run away with him ! " thought S'onya .
" She is capable of anything .
There was something particularly pathetic and resolute in her face today .
She cried as she said good - by to Uncle , " S'onya remembered . "
Yes , that 's it , she means to elope with him , but what am I to do ? " thought she , recalling all the signs that clearly indicated that Nat'asha had some terrible intention .
" The count is away .
What am I to do ?
Write to Kur'agin demanding an explanation ?
But what is there to oblige him to reply ?
Write to Pierre , as Prince Andrew asked me to in case of some misfortune ? ...
But perhaps she really has already refused Bolk'onski - she sent a letter to Princess Mary yesterday .
And Uncle is away .... "
To tell M'arya Dm'itrievna who had such faith in Nat'asha seemed to S'onya terrible . "
Well , anyway , " thought S'onya as she stood in the dark passage , " now or never I must prove that I remember the family 's goodness to me and that I love Nicholas .
Yes !
If I do n't sleep for three nights I 'll not leave this passage and will hold her back by force and will and not let the family be disgraced , " thought she .
CHAPTER XVI
Anatole had lately moved to D'olokhov 's .
Nat'asha had promised to come out to Kur'agin at the back porch at ten that evening .
Kur'agin was to put her into a troyka he would have ready and to drive her forty miles to the village of K'amenka , where an unfrocked priest was in readiness to perform a marriage ceremony over them .
At K'amenka
a relay of horses was to wait which would take them to the Warsaw highroad , and from there they would hasten abroad with post horses .
Anatole had a passport , an order for post horses , ten thousand rubles he had taken from his sister and another ten thousand borrowed with D'olokhov 's help .
D'olokhov was counting the money and noting something down .
" Well , " he said , " Khv'ostikov must have two thousand . "
" Give it to him , then , " said Anatole .
" Mak'arka " ( their name for Mak'arin ) " will go through fire and water for you for nothing .
So here are our accounts all settled , " said D'olokhov , showing him the memorandum .
" Is that right ? "
" Yes , of course , " returned Anatole , evidently not listening to D'olokhov and looking straight before him with a smile that did not leave his face .
D'olokhov banged down the lid of his desk and turned to Anatole with an ironic smile :
" Do you know ?
You 'd really better drop it all .
There 's still time ! "
" Fool , " retorted Anatole .
" Do n't talk nonsense !
If you only knew ... it 's the devil knows what ! "
" No , really , give it up ! " said D'olokhov .
" I am speaking seriously .
It 's no joke , this plot you 've hatched . "
" What , teasing again ?
Go to the devil !
Eh ? " said Anatole , making a grimace .
"
Really it 's no time for your stupid jokes , " and he left the room .
D'olokhov smiled contemptuously and condescendingly when Anatole had gone out .
" You wait a bit , " he called after him .
" I 'm not joking , I 'm talking sense .
Come here , come here ! "
Anatole returned and looked at D'olokhov , trying to give him his attention and evidently submitting to him involuntarily .
" Now listen to me .
I 'm telling you this for the last time .
Why should I joke about it ?
Did I hinder you ?
Who arranged everything for you ?
Who found the priest and got the passport ?
Who raised the money ?
I did it all . "
" Well , thank you for it .
Do you think I am not grateful ? "
And Anatole sighed and embraced D'olokhov .
" I helped you , but all the same I must tell you the truth ; it is a dangerous business , and if you think about it - a stupid business .
Well , you 'll carry her off - all right !
Will they let it stop at that ?
It will come out that you 're already married .
Why , they 'll have you in the criminal court .... "
" Oh , nonsense , nonsense ! "
Anatole ejaculated and again made a grimace . "
Did n't I explain to you ?
What ? "
And Anatole , with the partiality dull - witted people have for any conclusion they have reached by their own reasoning , repeated the argument he had already put to D'olokhov a hundred times .
Abroad no one will know anything about it .
Is n't that so ?
And do n't talk to me , do n't , do n't . "
" Seriously , you 'd better drop it !
You 'll only get yourself into a mess ! "
" Go to the devil ! " cried
Anatole and , clutching his hair , left the room , but returned at once and dropped into an armchair in front of D'olokhov with his feet turned under him .
" It 's the very devil !
What ?
Feel how it beats ! "
He took D'olokhov 's hand and put it on his heart . "
What a foot , my dear fellow !
What a glance !
A goddess ! "
he added in French .
" What ? "
D'olokhov with a cold smile and a gleam in his handsome insolent eyes looked at him - evidently wishing to get some more amusement out of him .
"
Well and when the money 's gone , what then ? "
" What then ?
Eh ? " repeated Anatole , sincerely perplexed by a thought of the future . "
What then ? ...
Then , I do n't know ....
But why talk nonsense ! "
He glanced at his watch .
" It 's time ! "
Anatole went into the back room .
" Now then !
Nearly ready ?
You 're dawdling !
" he shouted to the servants .
D'olokhov put away the money , called a footman whom he ordered to bring something for them to eat and drink before the journey , and went into the room where Khv'ostikov and Mak'arin were sitting .
Anatole lay on the sofa in the study leaning on his elbow and smiling pensively , while his handsome lips muttered tenderly to himself .
" Come and eat something .
Have a drink ! "
D'olokhov shouted to him from the other room .
" I do n't want to , " answered Anatole continuing to smile .
" Come !
Balag'a is here . "
Anatole rose and went into the dining room .
Balag'a was a famous troyka driver who had known D'olokhov and Anatole some six years and had given them good service with his troykas .
More than once when Anatole 's regiment was stationed at Tver he had taken him from Tver in the evening , brought him to Moscow by daybreak , and driven him back again the next night .
More than once he had enabled D'olokhov to escape when pursued .
More than once he had driven them through the town with gypsies and " ladykins " as he called the cocottes .
More than once in their service he had run over pedestrians and upset vehicles in the streets of Moscow and had always been protected from the consequences by " my gentlemen " as he called them .
He had ruined more than one horse in their service .
They often called Balag'a into their orgies and made him drink and dance at the gypsies ' , and more than one thousand rubles of their money had passed through his hands .
In their service he risked his skin and his life twenty times a year , and in their service had lost more horses than the money he had from them would buy .
But he liked them ; liked that mad driving at twelve miles an hour , liked upsetting a driver or running down a pedestrian , and flying at full gallop through the Moscow streets .
He liked to hear those wild , tipsy shouts behind him : " Get on !
Get on ! " when it was impossible to go any faster .
He liked giving a painful lash on the neck to some peasant who , more dead than alive , was already hurrying out of his way . "
Real gentlemen ! "
he considered them .
Anatole and D'olokhov liked Balag'a too for his masterly driving and because he liked the things they liked .
With others Balag'a bargained , charging twenty - five rubles for a two hours ' drive , and rarely drove himself , generally letting his young men do so .
But with " his gentlemen " he always drove himself and never demanded anything for his work .
The gentlemen always made him sit down .
" Do help me out , Theodore Iv'anych , sir , " or " your excellency , " he would say .
" I am quite out of horses .
Let me have what you can to go to the fair . "
And Anatole and D'olokhov , when they had money , would give him a thousand or a couple of thousand rubles .
Balag'a was a fair - haired , short , and snub - nosed peasant of about twenty - seven ; red - faced , with a particularly red thick neck , glittering little eyes , and a small beard .
He wore a fine , dark - blue , silk - lined cloth coat over a sheepskin .
On entering the room now he crossed himself , turning toward the front corner of the room , and went up to D'olokhov , holding out a small , black hand .
" Theodore Iv'anych ! "
he said , bowing .
" How d'you do , friend ?
Well , here he is ! "
" Good day , your excellency ! " he said , again holding out his hand to Anatole who had just come in .
" I say , Balag'a , " said Anatole , putting his hands on the man 's shoulders , " do you care for me or not ?
Eh ?
Now , do me a service ....
What horses have you come with ?
Eh ? "
" As your messenger ordered , your special beasts , " replied Balag'a .
" Well , listen , Balag'a !
Drive all three to death but get me there in three hours .
Eh ? "
" When they are dead , what shall I drive ? " said Balag'a with a wink .
" Mind , I 'll smash your face in !
Do n't make jokes ! "
cried Anatole , suddenly rolling his eyes .
" Why joke ? " said the driver , laughing .
" As if I 'd grudge my gentlemen anything !
As fast as ever the horses can gallop , so fast we 'll go ! "
" Ah ! " said Anatole . "
Well , sit down . "
" Yes , sit down ! " said D'olokhov .
" I 'll stand , Theodore Iv'anych . "
" Sit down ; nonsense !
Have a drink ! "
said Anatole , and filled a large glass of Madeira for him .
The driver 's eyes sparkled at the sight of the wine .
After refusing it for manners ' sake , he drank it and wiped his mouth with a red silk handkerchief he took out of his cap .
" And when are we to start , your excellency ? "
" Well ... " Anatole looked at his watch .
" We 'll start at once .
Mind , Balag'a !
You 'll get there in time ?
Eh ? "
" That depends on our luck in starting , else why should n't we be there in time ? " replied Balag'a .
" Did n't we get you to Tver in seven hours ?
I think you remember that , your excellency ? "
" Do you know , one Christmas I drove from Tver , " said Anatole , smilingly at the recollection and turning to Mak'arin who gazed rapturously at him with wide - open eyes .
" Will you believe it , Mak'arka , it took one 's breath away , the rate we flew .
We came across a train of loaded sleighs and drove right over two of them .
Eh ? "
" Those were horses ! "
Balag'a continued the tale .
" That time I 'd harnessed two young side horses with the bay in the shafts , " he went on , turning to D'olokhov . "
Will you believe it , Theodore Iv'anych , those animals flew forty miles ?
I could n't hold them in , my hands grew numb in the sharp frost so that I threw down the reins-'Catch hold yourself , your excellency ! '
says I , and I just tumbled on the bottom of the sleigh and sprawled there .
It was n't a case of urging them on , there was no holding them in till we reached the place .
The devils took us there in three hours !
Only the near one died of it . "
CHAPTER XVII
Anatole went out of the room and returned a few minutes later wearing a fur coat girt with a silver belt , and a sable cap jauntily set on one side and very becoming to his handsome face .
Having looked in a mirror , and standing before D'olokhov in the same pose he had assumed before it , he lifted a glass of wine .
" Well , good - by , Theodore .
Thank you for everything and farewell ! " said Anatole . "
Well , comrades and friends ... " he considered for a moment " ... of my youth , farewell ! "
he said , turning to Mak'arin and the others .
Though they were all going with him , Anatole evidently wished to make something touching and solemn out of this address to his comrades .
He spoke slowly in a loud voice and throwing out his chest slightly swayed one leg .
" All take glasses ; you too , Balag'a .
Well , comrades and friends of my youth , we 've had our fling and lived and reveled .
Eh ?
And now , when shall we meet again ?
I am going abroad .
We have had a good time - now farewell , lads !
To our health !
Hurrah ! ...
" he cried , and emptying his glass flung it on the floor .
" To your health ! " said Balag'a who also emptied his glass , and wiped his mouth with his handkerchief .
Mak'arin embraced Anatole with tears in his eyes .
" Ah , Prince , how sorry I am to part from you !
" Let 's go .
Let 's go ! "
cried Anatole .
Balag'a was about to leave the room .
" No , stop ! " said Anatole .
" Shut the door ; we have first to sit down .
That 's the way . "
They shut the door and all sat down .
" Now , quick march , lads ! "
said Anatole , rising .
Joseph , his valet , handed him his sabretache and saber , and they all went out into the vestibule .
" And where 's the fur cloak ? " asked D'olokhov . "
Hey , Ign'atka !
Go to Matr"ena Matr'evna and ask her for the sable cloak .
I have heard what elopements are like , " continued D'olokhov with a wink . "
The valet brought a woman 's fox - lined cloak .
" Fool , I told you the sable one !
Hey , Matr"ena , the sable ! "
he shouted so that his voice rang far through the rooms .
A handsome , slim , and pale - faced gypsy girl with glittering black eyes and curly blue - black hair , wearing a red shawl , ran out with a sable mantle on her arm .
" Here , I do n't grudge it - take it !
" she said , evidently afraid of her master and yet regretful of her cloak .
D'olokhov , without answering , took the cloak , threw it over Matr"ena , and wrapped her up in it .
" That 's the way , " said D'olokhov , " and then so ! "
and he turned the collar up round her head , leaving only a little of the face uncovered . "
And then so , do you see ? "
and he pushed Anatole 's head forward to meet the gap left by the collar , through which Matr"ena 's brilliant smile was seen .
" Well , good - by , Matr"ena , " said Anatole , kissing her . "
Ah , my revels here are over .
Remember me to St"eshka .
There , good - by !
Good - by , Matr"ena , wish me luck ! "
" Well , Prince , may God give you great luck ! " said Matr"ena in her gypsy accent .
Two troykas were standing before the porch and two young drivers were holding the horses .
Balag'a took his seat in the front one and holding his elbows high arranged the reins deliberately .
Anatole and D'olokhov got in with him .
Mak'arin , Khv'ostikov , and a valet seated themselves in the other sleigh .
" Well , are you ready ? " asked Balag'a .
" Go ! " he cried , twisting the reins round his hands , and the troyka tore down the Nik'itski Boulevard .
" Tproo ! Get out of the way !
Hi ! ...
Tproo ! ... "
The shouting of Balag'a and of the sturdy young fellow seated on the box was all that could be heard .
On the Arb'at Square the troyka caught against a carriage ; something cracked , shouts were heard , and the troyka flew along the Arb'at Street .
After taking a turn along the Podnov'inski Boulevard , Balag'a began to rein in , and turning back drew up at the crossing of the old Kony'usheny Street .
The young fellow on the box jumped down to hold the horses and Anatole and D'olokhov went along the pavement .
When they reached the gate D'olokhov whistled .
The whistle was answered , and a maidservant ran out .
" Come into the courtyard or you 'll be seen ; she 'll come out directly , " said she .
D'olokhov stayed by the gate .
Anatole followed the maid into the courtyard , turned the corner , and ran up into the porch .
He was met by Gabriel , M'arya Dm'itrievna 's gigantic footman .
" Come to the mistress , please , " said the footman in his deep bass , intercepting any retreat .
" To what Mistress ?
Who are you ? "
asked Anatole in a breathless whisper .
" Kindly step in , my orders are to bring you in . "
" Kur'agin ! Come back ! " shouted D'olokhov . "
Betrayed !
Back ! "
D'olokhov , after Anatole entered , had remained at the wicket gate and was struggling with the yard porter who was trying to lock it .
With a last desperate effort D'olokhov pushed the porter aside , and when Anatole ran back seized him by the arm , pulled him through the wicket , and ran back with him to the troyka .
CHAPTER XVIII
M'arya Dm'itrievna , having found S'onya weeping in the corridor , made her confess everything , and intercepting the note to Nat'asha
she read it and went into Nat'asha 's room with it in her hand .
" You shameless good - for - nothing ! " said she .
" I wo n't hear a word . "
When Gabriel came to inform her that the men who had come had run away again , she rose frowning , and clasping her hands behind her paced through the rooms a long time considering what she should do .
Toward midnight she went to Nat'asha 's room fingering the key in her pocket .
S'onya was sitting sobbing in the corridor . "
M'arya Dm'itrievna , for God 's sake let me in to her ! "
she pleaded , but M'arya Dm'itrievna unlocked the door and went in without giving her an answer .... "
Disgusting , abominable ...
In my house ... horrid girl , hussy !
I 'm only sorry for her father ! "
thought she , trying to restrain her wrath . "
Hard as it may be , I 'll tell them all to hold their tongues and will hide it from the count . "
She entered the room with resolute steps .
Nat'asha lying on the sofa , her head hidden in her hands , and she did not stir .
She was in just the same position in which M'arya Dm'itrievna had left her .
" A nice girl !
Very nice ! " said M'arya Dm'itrievna .
" Arranging meetings with lovers in my house !
It 's no use pretending : you listen when I speak to you ! "
And M'arya Dm'itrievna touched her arm .
" Listen when I speak !
You 've disgraced yourself like the lowest of hussies .
I 'd treat you differently , but I 'm sorry for your father , so I will conceal it . "
Nat'asha did not change her position , but her whole body heaved with noiseless , convulsive sobs which choked her .
M'arya Dm'itrievna glanced round at S'onya and seated herself on the sofa beside Nat'asha .
" It 's lucky for him that he escaped me ; but I 'll find him ! "
she said in her rough voice . "
Do you hear what I am saying or not ?
" she added .
She put her large hand under Nat'asha 's face and turned it toward her .
Both M'arya Dm'itrievna and S'onya were amazed when they saw how Nat'asha looked .
Her eyes were dry and glistening ,
her lips compressed , her cheeks sunken .
" Let me be ! ...
What is it to me ? ...
I shall die ! "
she muttered , wrenching herself from M'arya Dm'itrievna 's hands with a vicious effort and sinking down again into her former position .
" Natalie ! " said M'arya Dm'itrievna .
" I wish for your good .
Lie still , stay like that then , I wo n't touch you .
But listen .
I wo n't tell you how guilty you are .
You know that yourself .
But when your father comes back tomorrow what am I to tell him ?
Eh ? "
Again Nat'asha 's body shook with sobs .
" Suppose he finds out , and your brother , and your betrothed ? "
" I have no betrothed : I have refused him ! "
cried Nat'asha .
" That 's all the same , " continued M'arya Dm'itrievna .
" If they hear of this , will they let it pass ?
He , your father
, I know him ... if he challenges him to a duel will that be all right ?
Eh ? "
" Oh , let me be !
Why have you interfered at all ?
Why ?
Why ?
Who asked you to ? "
shouted Nat'asha , raising herself on the sofa and looking malignantly at M'arya Dm'itrievna .
" But what did you want ? " cried M'arya Dm'itrievna , growing angry again . "
Were you kept under lock and key ?
Who hindered his coming to the house ?
Why carry you off as if you were some gypsy singing girl ? ...
Well , if he had carried you off ... do you think they would n't have found him ?
Your father , or brother , or your betrothed ?
And he 's a scoundrel , a wretch -
that 's a fact ! "
" He is better than any of you ! "
exclaimed Nat'asha getting up .
"
If you had n't interfered ...
Oh , my God !
What is it all ?
What is it ?
S'onya , why ? ...
Go away ! "
And she burst into sobs with the despairing vehemence with which people bewail disasters they feel they have themselves occasioned .
M'arya Dm'itrievna was to speak again but Nat'asha cried out :
" Go away !
Go away !
You all hate and despise me ! "
and she threw herself back on the sofa .
Nat'asha did not reply , nor did she sob any longer , but she grew cold and had a shivering fit .
M'arya Dm'itrievna put a pillow under her head , covered her with two quilts , and herself brought her some lime - flower water , but Nat'asha did not respond to her .
" Well , let her sleep , " said M'arya Dm'itrievna as she went out of the room supposing Nat'asha to be asleep .
But Nat'asha was not asleep ; with pale face and fixed wide - open eyes she looked straight before her .
All that night she did not sleep or weep and did not speak to S'onya who got up and went to her several times .
Next day Count Rost'ov returned from his estate near Moscow in time for lunch as he had promised .
He was in very good spirits ; the affair with the purchaser was going on satisfactorily , and there was nothing to keep him any longer in Moscow , away from the countess whom he missed .
M'arya Dm'itrievna met him and told him that Nat'asha had been very unwell the day before and that they had sent for the doctor , but that she was better now .
Nat'asha had not left her room that morning .
With compressed and parched lips and dry fixed eyes , she sat at the window , uneasily watching the people who drove past and hurriedly glancing round at anyone who entered the room .
She was evidently expecting news of him and that he would come or would write to her .
When the count came to see her she turned anxiously round at the sound of a man 's footstep , and then her face resumed its cold and malevolent expression .
She did not even get up to greet him . "
What is the matter with you , my angel ?
Are you ill ? " asked the count .
After a moment 's silence Nat'asha answered : " Yes , ill . "
In reply to the count 's anxious inquiries as to why she was so dejected and whether anything had happened to her betrothed , she assured him that nothing had happened and asked him not to worry .
M'arya Dm'itrievna confirmed Nat'asha 's assurances that nothing had happened .
CHAPTER XIX
From the day his wife arrived in Moscow Pierre had been intending to go away somewhere , so as not to be near her .
Soon after the Rost'ovs came to Moscow the effect Nat'asha had on him made him hasten to carry out his intention .
He went to Tver to see Joseph Alex'eevich 's widow , who had long since promised to hand over to him some papers of her deceased husband 's .
When he returned to Moscow Pierre was handed a letter from M'arya Dm'itrievna asking him to come and see her on a matter of great importance relating to Andrew Bolk'onski and his betrothed .
Pierre had been avoiding Nat'asha because it seemed to him that his feeling for her was stronger than a married man 's should be for his friend 's fianc'ee .
Yet some fate constantly threw them together .
" What can have happened ?
And what can they want with me ?
" thought he as he dressed to go to M'arya Dm'itrievna 's . "
If only Prince Andrew would hurry up and come and marry her ! "
thought he on his way to the house .
On the Tversk'oy Boulevard a familiar voice called to him .
" Pierre ! Been back long ? " someone shouted .
Pierre raised his head .
In a sleigh drawn by two gray trotting - horses that were bespattering the dashboard with snow , Anatole and his constant companion Mak'arin dashed past .
Anatole was sitting upright in the classic pose of military dandies , the lower part of his face hidden by his beaver collar and his head slightly bent .
His face was fresh and rosy , his white - plumed hat , tilted to one side , disclosed his curled and pomaded hair besprinkled with powdery snow .
" Yes , indeed , that 's a true sage , " thought Pierre . "
He sees nothing beyond the pleasure of the moment , nothing troubles him and so he is always cheerful , satisfied , and serene .
What would n't I give to be like him ! "
he thought enviously .
In M'arya Dm'itrievna 's anteroom the footman who helped him off with his fur coat said that the mistress asked him to come to her bedroom .
When he opened the ballroom door Pierre saw Nat'asha sitting at the window , with a thin , pale , and spiteful face .
She glanced round at him , frowned , and left the room with an expression of cold dignity .
" What has happened ? " asked Pierre , entering M'arya Dm'itrievna 's room .
" Fine doings ! " answered Dm'itrievna .
" For fifty - eight years have I lived in this world and never known anything so disgraceful ! "
Pierre raised his shoulders and listened open - mouthed to what was told him , scarcely able to believe his own ears .
That Prince Andrew 's deeply loved affianced wife - the same Nat'asha Rost'ova who used to be so charming - should give up Bolk'onski for that fool
Anatole who was already secretly married ( as Pierre knew ) , and should be so in love with him as to agree to run away with him , was something Pierre could not conceive and could not imagine .
He could not reconcile the charming impression he had of Nat'asha , whom he had known from a child , with this new conception of her baseness , folly , and cruelty .
He thought of his wife .
" They are all alike ! "
he said to himself , reflecting that he was not the only man unfortunate enough to be tied to a bad woman .
He did not know that Nat'asha 's soul was overflowing with despair , shame , and humiliation , and that it was not her fault that her face happened to assume an expression of calm dignity and severity .
" But how get married ? " said Pierre , in answer to M'arya Dm'itrievna .
" He could not marry - he is married ! "
" Things get worse from hour to hour ! " ejaculated M'arya Dm'itrievna .
"
A nice youth !
What a scoundrel !
And she 's expecting him - expecting him since yesterday .
She must be told !
Then at least she wo n't go on expecting him . "
After hearing the details of Anatole 's marriage from Pierre , and giving vent to her anger against Anatole in words of abuse , M'arya Dm'itrievna told Pierre why she had sent for him .
Pierre - only now realizing the danger to the old count , Nicholas , and Prince Andrew - promised to do as she wished .
Having briefly and exactly explained her wishes to him , she let him go to the drawing room .
" Mind , the count knows nothing .
Behave as if you know nothing either , " she said .
" And I will go and tell her it is no use expecting him !
And stay to dinner if you care to !
" she called after Pierre .
Pierre met the old count , who seemed nervous and upset .
That morning Nat'asha had told him that she had rejected Bolk'onski .
" Troubles , troubles , my dear fellow ! " he said to Pierre . "
What troubles one has with these girls without their mother !
I do so regret having come here ....
I will be frank with you .
Have you heard she has broken off her engagement without consulting anybody ?
It 's true this engagement never was much to my liking .
Of course he is an excellent man , but still , with his father 's disapproval they would n't have been happy , and Nat'asha wo n't lack suitors .
Still , it has been going on so long , and to take such a step without father 's or mother 's consent !
And now she 's ill , and God knows what !
It 's hard , Count , hard to manage daughters in their mother 's absence .... "
Pierre saw that the count was much upset and tried to change the subject , but the count returned to his troubles .
S'onya entered the room with an agitated face .
" Nat'asha is not quite well ; she 's in her room and would like to see you .
M'arya Dm'itrievna is with her and she too asks you to come . "
" Yes , you are a great friend of Bolk'onski 's , no doubt she wants to send him a message , " said the count .
"
Oh dear !
Oh dear !
How happy it all was ! "
And clutching the spare gray locks on his temples the count left the room .
When M'arya Dm'itrievna told Nat'asha that Anatole was married , Nat'asha did not wish to believe it and insisted on having it confirmed by Pierre himself .
S'onya told Pierre this as she led him along the corridor to Nat'asha 's room .
Nat'asha , pale and stern , was sitting beside M'arya Dm'itrievna , and her eyes , glittering feverishly , met Pierre with a questioning look the moment he entered .
She did not smile or nod , but only gazed fixedly at him , and her look asked only one thing : was he a friend , or like the others an enemy in regard to Anatole ?
As for Pierre , he evidently did not exist for her .
" He knows all about it , " said M'arya Dm'itrievna pointing to Pierre and addressing Nat'asha .
" Let him tell you whether I have told the truth . "
Nat'asha looked from one to the other as a hunted and wounded animal looks at the approaching dogs and sportsmen .
" Then it is not true that he 's married ! "
" Yes , it is true . "
" Has he been married long ? " she asked . "
On your honor ? ... "
Pierre gave his word of honor .
" Is he still here ?
" she asked , quickly .
" Yes , I have just seen him . "
She was evidently unable to speak and made a sign with her hands that they should leave her alone .
CHAPTER XX
Pierre did not stay for dinner , but left the room and went away at once .
He drove through the town seeking Anatole Kur'agin , at the thought of whom now the blood rushed to his heart and he felt a difficulty in breathing .
He was not at the ice hills , nor at the gypsies ' , nor at Komoneno 's .
Pierre drove to the Club .
In the Club all was going on as usual .
The members who were assembling for dinner were sitting about in groups ; they greeted Pierre and spoke of the town news .
One of Pierre 's acquaintances , while they were talking about the weather , asked if he had heard of Kur'agin 's abduction of Rost'ova which was talked of in the town , and was it true ?
Pierre laughed and said it was nonsense for he had just come from the Rost'ovs ' .
He asked everyone about Anatole .
One man told him he had not come yet , and another that he was coming to dinner .
Pierre felt it strange to see this calm , indifferent crowd of people unaware of what was going on in his soul .
He paced through the ballroom , waited till everyone had come , and as Anatole had not turned up did not stay for dinner but drove home .
Anatole , for whom Pierre was looking , dined that day with D'olokhov , consulting him as to how to remedy this unfortunate affair .
It seemed to him essential to see Nat'asha .
In the evening he drove to his sister 's to discuss with her how to arrange a meeting .
When Pierre returned home after vainly hunting all over Moscow , his valet informed him that Prince Anatole was with the countess .
The countess ' drawing room was full of guests .
Pierre without greeting his wife whom he had not seen since his return - at that moment she was more repulsive to him than ever - entered the drawing room and seeing Anatole went up to him .
" Ah , Pierre , " said the countess going up to her husband .
" You do n't know what a plight our Anatole ... "
" Where you are , there is vice and evil ! " said Pierre to his wife .
" Anatole , come with me !
I must speak to you , " he added in French .
Anatole glanced round at his sister and rose submissively , ready to follow Pierre .
Pierre , taking him by the arm , pulled him toward himself and was leading him from the room .
" If you allow yourself in my drawing room ... " whispered H'el`ene , but Pierre did not reply and went out of the room .
Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but his face betrayed anxiety .
Having entered his study Pierre closed the door and addressed Anatole without looking at him .
" You promised Countess Rost'ova to marry her and were about to elope with her , is that so ? "
" Mon cher , " answered Anatole ( their whole conversation was in French ) , " I do n't consider myself bound to answer questions put to me in that tone . "
Pierre 's face , already pale , became distorted by fury .
He seized Anatole by the collar of his uniform with his big hand and shook him from side to side till Anatole 's face showed a sufficient degree of terror .
" When I tell you that I must talk to you ! ... " repeated Pierre .
" Come now , this is stupid .
What ? " said Anatole , fingering a button of his collar that had been wrenched loose with a bit of the cloth .
He took a heavy paperweight and lifted it threateningly , but at once put it back in its place .
" Did you promise to marry her ? "
" I ... I did n't think of it .
I never promised , because ... "
Pierre interrupted him .
" Have you any letters of hers ?
Any letters ?
" he said , moving toward Anatole .
Anatole glanced at him and immediately thrust his hand into his pocket and drew out his pocketbook .
Pierre took the letter Anatole handed him and , pushing aside a table that stood in his way , threw himself on the sofa .
" I sha n't be violent , do n't be afraid ! " said Pierre in answer to a frightened gesture of Anatole 's .
"
First , the letters , " said he , as if repeating a lesson to himself . "
Secondly , " he continued after a short pause , again rising and again pacing the room , " tomorrow you must get out of Moscow . "
" But how can I ? ... "
" Thirdly , " Pierre continued without listening to him , " you must never breathe a word of what has passed between you and Countess Rost'ova .
I know I ca n't prevent your doing so , but if you have a spark of conscience ... "
Pierre paced the room several times in silence .
Anatole sat at a table frowning and biting his lips .
" After all , you must understand that besides your pleasure there is such a thing as other people 's happiness and peace , and that you are ruining a whole life for the sake of amusing yourself !
Amuse yourself with women like my wife - with them
you are within your rights , for they know what you want of them .
They are armed against you by the same experience of debauchery ; but to promise a maid to marry her ... to deceive , to kidnap ....
Do n't you understand that it is as mean as beating an old man or a child ? ... "
Pierre paused and looked at Anatole no longer with an angry but with a questioning look .
" I do n't know about that , eh ? " said Anatole , growing more confident as Pierre mastered his wrath .
Pierre glanced at him with amazement , unable to understand what he wanted .
" Though it was t^ete-`a - t^ete , " Anatole continued , " still I ca n't ... "
" Is it satisfaction you want ? " said Pierre ironically .
" You could at least take back your words .
What ?
If you want me to do as you wish , eh ? "
" I take them back , I take them back ! " said Pierre , " and I ask you to forgive me . "
Pierre involuntarily glanced at the loose button . "
And if you require money for your journey ... "
Anatole smiled .
The expression of that base and cringing smile , which Pierre knew so well in his wife , revolted him .
" Oh , vile and heartless brood ! "
he exclaimed , and left the room .
Next day Anatole left for Petersburg .
CHAPTER XXI
Pierre drove to M'arya Dm'itrievna 's to tell her of the fulfillment of her wish that Kur'agin should be banished from Moscow .
The whole house was in a state of alarm and commotion .
Nat'asha was very ill , having , as M'arya Dm'itrievna told him in secret , poisoned herself the night after she had been told that Anatole was married , with some arsenic she had stealthily procured .
After swallowing a little she had been so frightened that she woke S'onya and told her what she had done .
Pierre saw the distracted count , and S'onya , who had a tear - stained face , but he could not see Nat'asha .
Pierre dined at the club that day and heard on all sides gossip about the attempted abduction of Rost'ova .
He resolutely denied these rumors , assuring everyone that nothing had happened except that his brother - in - law had proposed to her and been refused .
It seemed to Pierre that it was his duty to conceal the whole affair and re - establish Nat'asha 's reputation .
He was awaiting Prince Andrew 's return with dread and went every day to the old prince 's for news of him .
Old Prince Bolk'onski heard all the rumors current in the town from Mademoiselle Bourienne and had read the note to Princess Mary in which Nat'asha had broken off her engagement .
He seemed in better spirits than usual and awaited his son with great impatience .
Some days after Anatole 's departure Pierre received a note from Prince Andrew , informing him of his arrival and asking him to come to see him .
As soon as he reached Moscow , Prince Andrew had received from his father Nat'asha 's note to Princess Mary breaking off her engagement
( Mademoiselle Bourienne had purloined it from Princess Mary and given it to the old prince ) , and he heard from him the story of Nat'asha 's elopement , with additions .
Prince Andrew had arrived in the evening and Pierre came to see him next morning .
The old prince 's voice and another now and then interrupted him .
Princess Mary came out to meet Pierre .
" He says he expected it , " she remarked .
" I know his pride will not let him express his feelings , but still he has taken it better , far better , than I expected .
Evidently it had to be .... "
" But is it possible that all is really ended ? " asked Pierre .
Princess Mary looked at him with astonishment .
She did not understand how he could ask such a question .
Pierre went into the study .
Prince Andrew , greatly changed and plainly in better health , but with a fresh horizontal wrinkle between his brows , stood in civilian dress facing his father and Prince Meshch'erski , warmly disputing and vigorously gesticulating .
The conversation was about Sper'anski - the news of whose sudden exile and alleged treachery had just reached Moscow .
" Now he is censured and accused by all who were enthusiastic about him a month ago , " Prince Andrew was saying , " and by those who were unable to understand his aims .
He paused at the sight of Pierre .
His face quivered and immediately assumed a vindictive expression .
" Posterity will do him justice , " he concluded , and at once turned to Pierre .
" Well , how are you ?
Still getting stouter ?
" he said with animation , but the new wrinkle on his forehead deepened . "
Yes , I am well , " he said in answer to Pierre 's question , and smiled .
To Pierre that smile said plainly : " I am well , but my health is now of no use to anyone . "
" If there were treason , or proofs of secret relations with Napoleon , they would have been made public , " he said with warmth and haste .
" I do not , and never did , like Sper'anski personally , but I like justice ! "
Pierre now recognized in his friend a need with which he was only too familiar , to get excited and to have arguments about extraneous matters in order to stifle thoughts that were too oppressive and too intimate .
When Prince Meshch'erski had left , Prince Andrew took Pierre 's arm and asked him into the room that had been assigned him .
A bed had been made up there , and some open portmanteaus and trunks stood about .
Prince Andrew went to one and took out a small casket , from which he drew a packet wrapped in paper .
He did it all silently and very quickly .
He stood up and coughed .
His face was gloomy and his lips compressed .
" Forgive me for troubling you .... "
Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was going to speak of Nat'asha , and his broad face expressed pity and sympathy .
This expression irritated Prince Andrew , and in a determined , ringing , and unpleasant tone he continued :
" I have received a refusal from Countess Rost'ova and have heard reports of your brother - in - law having sought her hand , or something of that kind .
Is that true ? "
" Both true and untrue , " Pierre began ; but Prince Andrew interrupted him .
" Here are her letters and her portrait , " said he .
He took the packet from the table and handed it to Pierre .
" Give this to the countess ... if you see her . "
" She is very ill , " said Pierre .
" Then she is here still ? " said Prince Andrew .
" And Prince Kur'agin ? "
he added quickly .
" He left long ago .
She has been at death 's door . "
" I much regret her illness , " said Prince Andrew ; and he smiled like his father , coldly , maliciously , and unpleasantly .
" So Monsieur Kur'agin has not honored Countess Rost'ova with his hand ? " said Prince Andrew , and he snorted several times .
" He could not marry , for he was married already , " said Pierre .
Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably , again reminding one of his father .
" And where is your brother - in - law now , if I may ask ? " he said .
" He has gone to Peters ...
But I do n't know , " said Pierre .
" Well , it does n't matter , " said Prince Andrew .
" Tell Countess Rost'ova that she was and is perfectly free and that I wish her all that is good . "
Pierre took the packet .
Prince Andrew , as if trying to remember whether he had something more to say , or waiting to see if Pierre would say anything , looked fixedly at him .
" I say , do you remember our discussion in Petersburg ? " asked Pierre , " about ... "
" Yes , " returned Prince Andrew hastily .
" I said that a fallen woman should be forgiven , but I did n't say I could forgive her .
I ca n't . "
" But can this be compared ... ? " said Pierre .
Prince Andrew interrupted him and cried sharply : " Yes , ask her hand again , be magnanimous , and so on ? ...
Yes , that would be very noble , but I am unable to follow in that gentleman 's footsteps .
If you wish to be my friend never speak to me of that ... of all that !
Well , good - by .
So you 'll give her the packet ? "
Pierre left the room and went to the old prince and Princess Mary .
The old man seemed livelier than usual .
Princess Mary was the same as always , but beneath her sympathy for her brother , Pierre noticed her satisfaction that the engagement had been broken off .
At dinner the talk turned on the war , the approach of which was becoming evident .
Prince Andrew talked incessantly , arguing now with his father , now with the Swiss tutor Dessalles , and showing an unnatural animation , the cause of which Pierre so well understood .
CHAPTER XXII
That same evening Pierre went to the Rost'ovs ' to fulfill the commission entrusted to him .
Nat'asha was in bed , the count at the club , and Pierre , after giving the letters to S'onya , went to M'arya Dm'itrievna who was interested to know how Prince Andrew had taken the news .
Ten minutes later S'onya came to M'arya Dm'itrievna .
" Nat'asha insists on seeing Count Peter Kir'ilovich , " said she .
" But how ?
Are we to take him up to her ?
The room there has not been tidied up . "
" No , she has dressed and gone into the drawing room , " said S'onya .
M'arya Dm'itrievna only shrugged her shoulders .
" When will her mother come ?
She has worried me to death !
Now mind , do n't tell her everything ! "
said she to Pierre .
" One has n't the heart to scold her , she is so much to be pitied , so much to be pitied . "
Nat'asha was standing in the middle of the drawing room , emaciated , with a pale set face , but not at all shamefaced as Pierre expected to find her .
When he appeared at the door she grew flurried , evidently undecided whether to go to meet him or to wait till he came up .
Pierre hastened to her .
" Peter Kir'ilovich , " she began rapidly , " Prince Bolk'onski was your friend - is your friend , " she corrected herself .
( It seemed to her that everything that had once been must now be different . ) "
He told me once to apply to you ... "
Pierre sniffed as he looked at her , but did not speak .
Till then he had reproached her in his heart and tried to despise her , but he now felt so sorry for her that there was no room in his soul for reproach .
" He is here now : tell him ... to for ... forgive me ! "
She stopped and breathed still more quickly , but did not shed tears .
" Yes ... I will tell him , " answered Pierre ; " but ... "
He did not know what to say .
Nat'asha was evidently dismayed at the thought of what he might think she had meant .
" No , I know all is over , " she said hurriedly .
" No , that can never be .
I 'm only tormented by the wrong I have done him .
Tell him only that I beg him to forgive , forgive , forgive me for everything .... "
She trembled all over and sat down on a chair .
A sense of pity he had never before known overflowed Pierre 's heart .
" I will tell him , I will tell him everything once more , " said Pierre . "
But ... I should like to know one thing .... "
" Know what ?
" Nat'asha 's eyes asked .
" I should like to know , did you love ... " Pierre did not know how to refer to Anatole and flushed at the thought of him-"did you love that bad man ? "
" Do n't call him bad ! " said Nat'asha . "
But I do n't know , do n't know at all .... "
She began to cry and a still greater sense of pity , tenderness , and love welled up in Pierre .
He felt the tears trickle under his spectacles and hoped they would not be noticed .
" We wo n't speak of it any more , my dear , " said Pierre , and his gentle , cordial tone suddenly seemed very strange to Nat'asha .
He took her hand and kissed it .
" I shall be happy if it 's in my power ... "
Pierre grew confused .
" Do n't speak to me like that .
I am not worth it ! "
exclaimed Nat'asha and turned to leave the room , but Pierre held her hand .
He knew he had something more to say to her .
But when he said it he was amazed at his own words .
" Stop , stop !
You have your whole life before you , " said he to her .
" Before me ?
No !
All is over for me , " she replied with shame and self - abasement .
" All over ? " he repeated .
" If I were not myself , but the handsomest , cleverest , and best man in the world , and were free , I would this moment ask on my knees for your hand and your love ! "
For the first time for many days Nat'asha wept tears of gratitude and tenderness , and glancing at Pierre she went out of the room .
Pierre too when she had gone almost ran into the anteroom , restraining tears of tenderness and joy that choked him , and without finding the sleeves of his fur cloak threw it on and got into his sleigh .
" Where to now , your excellency ? " asked the coachman .
" Where to ? " Pierre asked himself .
" Where can I go now ?
Surely not to the Club or to pay calls ?
" All men seemed so pitiful , so poor , in comparison with this feeling of tenderness and love he experienced : in comparison with that softened , grateful , last look she had given him through her tears .
" Home ! " said Pierre , and despite twenty - two degrees of frost Fahrenheit he threw open the bearskin cloak from his broad chest and inhaled the air with joy .
It was clear and frosty .
Above the dirty , ill - lit streets , above the black roofs , stretched the dark starry sky .
Only looking up at the sky did Pierre cease to feel how sordid and humiliating were all mundane things compared with the heights to which his soul had just been raised .
At the entrance to the Arb'at Square an immense expanse of dark starry sky presented itself to his eyes .
In Pierre , however , that comet with its long luminous tail aroused no feeling of fear .
It seemed to Pierre that this comet fully responded to what was passing in his own softened and uplifted soul , now blossoming into a new life .
BOOK NINE : 1812
CHAPTER I
On the twelfth of June , 1812 , the forces of Western Europe crossed the Russian frontier and war began , that is , an event took place opposed to human reason and to human nature .
What produced this extraordinary occurrence ?
What were its causes ?
We can understand that the matter seemed like that to contemporaries .
It naturally seemed to Napoleon that the war was caused by England 's intrigues ( as in fact he said on the island of St. Helena ) .
To us it is incomprehensible that millions of Christian men killed and tortured each other either because Napoleon was ambitious or Alexander was firm , or because England 's policy was astute or the Duke of Oldenburg wronged .
To us , their descendants , who are not historians and are not carried away by the process of research and can therefore regard the event with unclouded common sense , an incalculable number of causes present themselves .
Without each of these causes nothing could have happened .
So all these causes - myriads of causes - coincided to bring it about .
And so there was no one cause for that occurrence , but it had to occur because it had to .
The actions of Napoleon and Alexander , on whose words the event seemed to hang , were as little voluntary as the actions of any soldier who was drawn into the campaign by lot or by conscription .
We are forced to fall back on fatalism as an explanation of irrational events ( that is to say , events the reasonableness of which we do not understand ) .
The more we try to explain such events in history reasonably , the more unreasonable and incomprehensible do they become to us .
Man lives consciously for himself , but is an unconscious instrument in the attainment of the historic , universal , aims of humanity .
A deed done is irrevocable , and its result coinciding in time with the actions of millions of other men assumes an historic significance .
The higher a man stands on the social ladder , the more people he is connected with and the more power he has over others , the more evident is the predestination and inevitability of his every action .
" The king 's heart is in the hands of the Lord . "
A king is history 's slave .
History , that is , the unconscious , general , hive life of mankind , uses every moment of the life of kings as a tool for its own purposes .
* " To shed ( or not to shed ) the blood of his peoples . "
When an apple has ripened and falls , why does it fall ?
Nothing is the cause .
All this is only the coincidence of conditions in which all vital organic and elemental events occur .
In historic events the so - called great men are labels giving names to events , and like labels they have but the smallest connection with the event itself .
Every act of theirs , which appears to them an act of their own will , is in an historical sense involuntary and is related to the whole course of history and predestined from eternity .
CHAPTER II
On the twenty - ninth of May Napoleon left Dresden , where he had spent three weeks surrounded by a court that included princes , dukes , kings , and even an emperor .
He went in a traveling coach with six horses , surrounded by pages , aides - de - camp , and an escort , along the road to Posen , Thorn , Danzig , and K"onigsberg .
At each of these towns thousands of people met him with excitement and enthusiasm .
The army was moving from west to east , and relays of six horses carried him in the same direction .
On the tenth of June , * coming up with the army , he spent the night in apartments prepared for him on the estate of a Polish count in the Vilkavisski forest .
* Old style .
Next day , overtaking the army , he went in a carriage to the Niemen , and , changing into a Polish uniform , he drove to the riverbank in order to select a place for the crossing .
" Now we 'll go into action .
Oh , when he takes it in hand himself , things get hot ... by heaven ! ...
There he is ! ...
Vive l'Empereur !
So these are the steppes of Asia !
It 's a nasty country all the same .
Au revoir , Beauch'e ; I 'll keep the best palace in Moscow for you !
Au revoir .
Good luck ! ...
Did you see the Emperor ?
Vive l'Empereur ! ...
preur!-If they make me Governor of India , G'erard , I 'll make you Minister of Kashmir - that 's settled .
Vive l'Empereur !
Hurrah !
hurrah !
hurrah !
The Cossacks - those rascals - see how they run !
Vive l'Empereur !
There he is , do you see him ?
I 've seen him twice , as I see you now .
The little corporal ...
I saw him give the cross to one of the veterans ....
Vive l'Empereur !
" came the voices of men , old and young , of most diverse characters and social positions .
On the faces of all was one common expression of joy at the commencement of the long - expected campaign and of rapture and devotion to the man in the gray coat who was standing on the hill .
On the thirteenth of June a rather small , thoroughbred Arab horse was brought to Napoleon .
On reaching the broad river V'iliya , he stopped near a regiment of Polish Uhlans stationed by the river .
" Vivat ! " shouted the Poles , ecstatically , breaking their ranks and pressing against one another to see him .
Napoleon looked up and down the river , dismounted , and sat down on a log that lay on the bank .
At a mute sign from him , a telescope was handed him which he rested on the back of a happy page who had run up to him , and he gazed at the opposite bank .
Then he became absorbed in a map laid out on the logs .
Without lifting his head he said something , and two of his aides - de - camp galloped off to the Polish Uhlans .
" What ?
What did he say ?
" was heard in the ranks of the Polish Uhlans when one of the aides - de - camp rode up to them .
The order was to find a ford and to cross the river .
In evident fear of refusal , like a boy asking for permission to get on a horse , he begged to be allowed to swim across the river before the Emperor 's eyes .
The aide - de - camp replied that probably the Emperor would not be displeased at this excess of zeal .
As soon as the aide - de - camp had said this , the old mustached officer , with happy face and sparkling eyes , raised his saber , shouted " Vivat ! "
and , commanding the Uhlans to follow him , spurred his horse and galloped into the river .
He gave an angry thrust to his horse , which had grown restive under him , and plunged into the water , heading for the deepest part where the current was swift .
Hundreds of Uhlans galloped in after him .
It was cold and uncanny in the rapid current in the middle of the stream , and the Uhlans caught hold of one another as they fell off their horses .
Some of the horses were drowned and some of the men ; the others tried to swim on , some in the saddle and some clinging to their horses ' manes .
For him it was no new conviction that his presence in any part of the world , from Africa to the steppes of Muscovy alike , was enough to dumfound people and impel them to insane self - oblivion .
He called for his horse and rode to his quarters .
Some forty Uhlans were drowned in the river , though boats were sent to their assistance .
The majority struggled back to the bank from which they had started .
The colonel and some of his men got across and with difficulty clambered out on the further bank .
Quos vult perdere dementat . *
* Those whom ( God ) wishes to destroy he drives mad .
CHAPTER III
The Emperor of Russia had , meanwhile , been in V'ilna for more than a month , reviewing troops and holding maneuvers .
Nothing was ready for the war that everyone expected and to prepare for which the Emperor had come from Petersburg .
There was no general plan of action .
The vacillation between the various plans that were proposed had even increased after the Emperor had been at headquarters for a month .
Each of the three armies had its own commander in chief , but there was no supreme commander of all the forces , and the Emperor did not assume that responsibility himself .
The longer the Emperor remained in V'ilna the less did everybody - tired of waiting - prepare for the war .
All the efforts of those who surrounded the sovereign seemed directed merely to making him spend his time pleasantly and forget that war was impending .
This idea was eagerly received .
The Emperor gave his consent .
The aides - de - camp collected money by subscription .
The lady who was thought to be most pleasing to the Emperor was invited to act as hostess .
It was a gay and brilliant fete .
Connoisseurs of such matters declared that rarely had so many beautiful women been assembled in one place .
Countess Bez'ukhova was present among other Russian ladies who had followed the sovereign from Petersburg to V'ilna and eclipsed the refined Polish ladies by her massive , so - called Russian type of beauty .
The Emperor noticed her and honored her with a dance .
Bor'is was now a rich man who had risen to high honors and no longer sought patronage but stood on an equal footing with the highest of those of his own age .
At midnight dancing was still going on .
H'el`ene , not having a suitable partner , herself offered to dance the mazurka with Bor'is .
They were the third couple .
The Emperor was not dancing , he stood in the doorway , stopping now one pair and now another with gracious words which he alone knew how to utter .
Having finished speaking to her , the Emperor looked inquiringly at Balash"ev and , evidently understanding that he only acted thus because there were important reasons for so doing , nodded slightly to the lady and turned to him .
Hardly had Balash"ev begun to speak before a look of amazement appeared on the Emperor 's face .
He took Balash"ev by the arm and crossed the room with him , unconsciously clearing a path seven yards wide as the people on both sides made way for him .
Bor'is noticed Arakch'eev 's excited face when the sovereign went out with Balash"ev .
Arakch'eev looked at the Emperor from under his brow and , sniffing with his red nose , stepped forward from the crowd as if expecting the Emperor to address him .
( Bor'is understood that Arakch'eev envied Balash"ev and was displeased that evidently important news had reached the Emperor otherwise than through himself . )
But the Emperor and Balash"ev passed out into the illuminated garden without noticing Arakch'eev who , holding his sword and glancing wrathfully around , followed some twenty paces behind them .
All the time Bor'is was going through the figures of the mazurka , he was worried by the question of what news Balash"ev had brought and how he could find it out before others .
They were moving toward the door .
Bor'is , fluttering as if he had not had time to withdraw , respectfully pressed close to the doorpost with bowed head .
The Emperor , with the agitation of one who has been personally affronted , was finishing with these words :
" To enter Russia without declaring war !
I will not make peace as long as a single armed enemy remains in my country ! "
It seemed to Bor'is that it gave the Emperor pleasure to utter these words .
He was satisfied with the form in which he had expressed his thoughts , but displeased that Bor'is had overheard it .
" Let no one know of it ! "
the Emperor added with a frown .
Bor'is understood that this was meant for him and , closing his eyes , slightly bowed his head .
The Emperor re - entered the ballroom and remained there about another half - hour .
The unexpected news of the French having crossed the Niemen was particularly startling after a month of unfulfilled expectations , and at a ball .
On first receiving the news , under the influence of indignation and resentment the Emperor had found a phrase that pleased him , fully expressed his feelings , and has since become famous .
Next day the following letter was sent to Napoleon :
Monsieur mon fr`ere ,
The reasons on which the Duc de Bassano based his refusal to deliver them to him would never have led me to suppose that that could serve as a pretext for aggression .
In fact , the ambassador , as he himself has declared , was never authorized to make that demand , and as soon as I was informed of it
I let him know how much I disapproved of it and ordered him to remain at his post .
In the contrary case , Your Majesty , I shall see myself forced to repel an attack that nothing on my part has provoked .
It still depends on Your Majesty to preserve humanity from the calamity of another war .
I am , etc . ,
( signed ) Alexander
CHAPTER IV
At two in the morning of the fourteenth of June , the Emperor , having sent for Balash"ev and read him his letter to Napoleon , ordered him to take it and hand it personally to the French Emperor .
When dispatching Balash"ev , the Emperor repeated to him the words that he would not make peace so long as a single armed enemy remained on Russian soil and told him to transmit those words to Napoleon .
There he was stopped by French cavalry sentinels .
A French noncommissioned officer of hussars , in crimson uniform and a shaggy cap , shouted to the approaching Balash"ev to halt .
Balash"ev did not do so at once , but continued to advance along the road at a walking pace .
Balash"ev mentioned who he was .
The noncommissioned officer began talking with his comrades about regimental matters without looking at the Russian general .
The sun was only just appearing from behind the clouds , the air was fresh and dewy .
A herd of cattle was being driven along the road from the village , and over the fields the larks rose trilling , one after another , like bubbles rising in water .
Balash"ev looked around him , awaiting the arrival of an officer from the village .
The Russian Cossacks and bugler and the French hussars looked silently at one another from time to time .
A French colonel of hussars , who had evidently just left his bed , came riding from the village on a handsome sleek gray horse , accompanied by two hussars .
The officer , the soldiers , and their horses all looked smart and well kept .
The French colonel with difficulty repressed a yawn , but was polite and evidently understood Balash"ev 's importance .
The colonel said that the commander of the division was a mile and a quarter away and would receive Balash"ev and conduct him to his destination .
The sun had by now risen and shone gaily on the bright verdure .
They had hardly ridden up a hill , past a tavern , before they saw a group of horsemen coming toward them .
In front of the group , on a black horse with trappings that glittered in the sun , rode a tall man with plumes in his hat and black hair curling down to his shoulders .
He wore a red mantle , and stretched his long legs forward in French fashion .
This man rode toward Balash"ev at a gallop , his plumes flowing and his gems and gold lace glittering in the bright June sunshine .
It was , in fact , Murat , now called " King of Naples . "
Though it was quite incomprehensible why he should be King of Naples , he was called so , and was himself convinced that he was so , and therefore assumed a more solemn and important air than formerly .
* he turned to his wife with a pensive smile and said : " Poor fellows , they do n't know that I am leaving them tomorrow ! "
* " Long live the king . "
On seeing the Russian general he threw back his head , with its long hair curling to his shoulders , in a majestically royal manner , and looked inquiringly at the French colonel .
The colonel respectfully informed His Majesty of Balash"ev 's mission , whose name he could not pronounce .
" De Bal - mach`eve ! " said the King ( overcoming by his assurance the difficulty that had presented itself to the colonel ) .
" Charmed to make your acquaintance , General ! " he added , with a gesture of kingly condescension .
As soon as the King began to speak loud and fast his royal dignity instantly forsook him , and without noticing it he passed into his natural tone of good - natured familiarity .
He laid his hand on the withers of Balash"ev 's horse and said :
" Well , General , it all looks like war , " as if regretting a circumstance of which he was unable to judge .
Murat 's face beamed with stupid satisfaction as he listened to " Monsieur de Bal - mach`eve . "
But royaut'e oblige !
* and he felt it incumbent on him , as a king and an ally , to confer on state affairs with Alexander 's envoy .
He dismounted , took Balash"ev 's arm , and moving a few steps away from his suite , which waited respectfully , began to pace up and down with him , trying to speak significantly .
He referred to the fact that the Emperor Napoleon had resented the demand that he should withdraw his troops from Prussia , especially when that demand became generally known and the dignity of France was thereby offended .
* " Royalty has its obligations . "
Balash"ev replied that there was " nothing offensive in the demand , because ... " but Murat interrupted him .
" Then you do n't consider the Emperor Alexander the aggressor ? " he asked unexpectedly , with a kindly and foolish smile .
Balash"ev told him why he considered Napoleon to be the originator of the war .
" Oh , my dear general ! "
Murat again interrupted him , " with all my heart I wish the Emperors may arrange the affair between them , and that the war begun by no wish of mine may finish as quickly as possible ! "
said he , in the tone of a servant who wants to remain good friends with another despite a quarrel between their masters .
And he went on to inquiries about the Grand Duke and the state of his health , and to reminiscences of the gay and amusing times he had spent with him in Naples .
Then suddenly , as if remembering his royal dignity , Murat solemnly drew himself up , assumed the pose in which he had stood at his coronation , and , waving his right arm , said :
" I wo n't detain you longer , General .
I wish success to your mission , " and with his embroidered red mantle , his flowing feathers , and his glittering ornaments , he rejoined his suite who were respectfully awaiting him .
Balash"ev rode on , supposing from Murat 's words that he would very soon be brought before Napoleon himself .
CHAPTER V
Davout was to Napoleon what Arakch'eev was to Alexander - though not a coward like Arakch'eev , he was as precise , as cruel , and as unable to express his devotion to his monarch except by cruelty .
Balash"ev found Davout seated on a barrel in the shed of a peasant 's hut , writing - he was auditing accounts .
Better quarters could have been found him , but Marshal Davout was one of those men who purposely put themselves in most depressing conditions to have a justification for being gloomy .
For the same reason they are always hard at work and in a hurry .
" How can I think of the bright side of life when , as you see , I am sitting on a barrel and working in a dirty shed ? "
the expression of his face seemed to say .
The chief pleasure and necessity of such men , when they encounter anyone who shows animation , is to flaunt their own dreary , persistent activity .
Davout allowed himself that pleasure when Balash"ev was brought in .
When he noticed in Balash"ev 's face the disagreeable impression this reception produced , Davout raised his head and coldly asked what he wanted .
Contrary to his expectation , Davout , after hearing him , became still surlier and ruder .
" Where is your dispatch ? " he inquired .
" Give it to me .
I will send it to the Emperor . "
Balash"ev replied that he had been ordered to hand it personally to the Emperor .
" Your Emperor 's orders are obeyed in your army , but here , " said Davout , " you must do as you 're told . "
And , as if to make the Russian general still more conscious of his dependence on brute force , Davout sent an adjutant to call the officer on duty .
Balash"ev took out the packet containing the Emperor 's letter and laid it on the table ( made of a door with its hinges still hanging on it , laid across two barrels ) .
Davout took the packet and read the inscription .
" You are perfectly at liberty to treat me with respect or not , " protested Balash"ev , " but permit me to observe that I have the honor to be adjutant general to His Majesty .... "
Davout glanced at him silently and plainly derived pleasure from the signs of agitation and confusion which appeared on Balash"ev 's face .
" You will be treated as is fitting , " said he and , putting the packet in his pocket , left the shed .
A minute later the marshal 's adjutant , de Castr`es , came in and conducted Balash"ev to the quarters assigned him .
That day he dined with the marshal , at the same board on the barrels .
Next day the imperial gentleman - in - waiting , the Comte de Turenne , came to Balash"ev and informed him of the Emperor Napoleon 's wish to honor him with an audience .
Napoleon received Balash"ev in the very house in V'ilna from which Alexander had dispatched him on his mission .
CHAPTER VI
Though Balash"ev was used to imperial pomp , he was amazed at the luxury and magnificence of Napoleon 's court .
Duroc said that Napoleon would receive the Russian general before going for his ride .
After some minutes , the gentleman - in - waiting who was on duty came into the great reception room and , bowing politely , asked Balash"ev to follow him .
Balash"ev went into a small reception room , one door of which led into a study , the very one from which the Russian Emperor had dispatched him on his mission .
He stood a minute or two , waiting .
His short hair had evidently just been brushed , but one lock hung down in the middle of his broad forehead .
His plump white neck stood out sharply above the black collar of his uniform , and he smelled of Eau de Cologne .
His full face , rather young - looking , with its prominent chin , wore a gracious and majestic expression of imperial welcome .
He entered briskly , with a jerk at every step and his head slightly thrown back .
His whole short corpulent figure with broad thick shoulders , and chest and stomach involuntarily protruding , had that imposing and stately appearance one sees in men of forty who live in comfort .
It was evident , too , that he was in the best of spirits that day .
" Good day , General ! " said he .
" I have received the letter you brought from the Emperor Alexander and am very glad to see you . "
He glanced with his large eyes into Balash"ev 's face and immediately looked past him .
It was plain that Balash"ev 's personality did not interest him at all .
Evidently only what took place within his own mind interested him .
Nothing outside himself had any significance for him , because everything in the world , it seemed to him , depended entirely on his will .
" I do not , and did not , desire war , " he continued , " but it has been forced on me .
Even now " ( he emphasized the word ) " I am ready to receive any explanations you can give me . "
And he began clearly and concisely to explain his reasons for dissatisfaction with the Russian government .
Judging by the calmly moderate and amicable tone in which the French Emperor spoke , Balash"ev was firmly persuaded that he wished for peace and intended to enter into negotiations .
When Napoleon , having finished speaking , looked inquiringly at the Russian envoy , Balash"ev began a speech he had prepared long before : " Sire !
The Emperor , my master ... " but the sight of the Emperor 's eyes bent on him confused him .
" You are flurried - compose yourself ! "
Napoleon seemed to say , as with a scarcely perceptible smile he looked at Balash"ev 's uniform and sword .
Balash"ev recovered himself and began to speak .
" Not yet ! " interposed Napoleon , and , as if fearing to give vent to his feelings , he frowned and nodded slightly as a sign that Balash"ev might proceed .
After saying all he had been instructed to say , Balash"ev added that the Emperor Alexander wished for peace , but would not enter into negotiations except on condition that ...
Here Balash"ev hesitated : he remembered the words the Emperor Alexander had not written in his letter , but had specially inserted in the rescript to Saltyk'ov and had told Balash"ev to repeat to Napoleon .
Balash"ev remembered these words , " So long as a single armed foe remains on Russian soil , " but some complex feeling restrained him .
He could not utter them , though he wished to do so .
He grew confused and said : " On condition that the French army retires beyond the Niemen . "
Napoleon noticed Balash"ev 's embarrassment when uttering these last words ; his face twitched and the calf of his left leg began to quiver rhythmically .
Without moving from where he stood he began speaking in a louder tone and more hurriedly than before .
During the speech that followed , Balash"ev , who more than once lowered his eyes , involuntarily noticed the quivering of Napoleon 's left leg which increased the more Napoleon raised his voice .
" I desire peace , no less than the Emperor Alexander , " he began .
" Have I not for eighteen months been doing everything to obtain it ?
I have waited eighteen months for explanations .
But in order to begin negotiations , what is demanded of me ?
" he said , frowning and making an energetic gesture of inquiry with his small white plump hand .
" The withdrawal of your army beyond the Niemen , sire , " replied Balash"ev .
" The Niemen ? " repeated Napoleon . "
So now you want me to retire beyond the Niemen - only the Niemen ?
" repeated Napoleon , looking straight at Balash"ev .
The latter bowed his head respectfully .
Instead of the demand of four months earlier to withdraw from Pomerania , only a withdrawal beyond the Niemen was now demanded .
Napoleon turned quickly and began to pace the room .
He went in silence from one corner of the room to the other and again stopped in front of Balash"ev .
Balash"ev noticed that his left leg was quivering faster than before and his face seemed petrified in its stern expression .
This quivering of his left leg was a thing Napoleon was conscious of . "
The vibration of my left calf is a great sign with me , " he remarked at a later date .
" Such demands as to retreat beyond the Vistula and Oder may be made to a Prince of Baden , but not to me ! "
Napoleon almost screamed , quite to his own surprise . "
If you gave me Petersburg and Moscow I could not accept such conditions .
You say I have begun this war !
But who first joined his army ?
The Emperor Alexander , not I !
And you offer me negotiations when I have expended millions , when you are in alliance with England , and when your position is a bad one .
You offer me negotiations !
But what is the aim of your alliance with England ?
What has she given you ?
" he continued hurriedly , evidently no longer trying to show the advantages of peace and discuss its possibility , but only to prove his own rectitude and power and Alexander 's errors and duplicity .
The commencement of his speech had obviously been made with the intention of demonstrating the advantages of his position and showing that he was nevertheless willing to negotiate .
But he had begun talking , and the more he talked the less could he control his words .
The whole purport of his remarks now was evidently to exalt himself and insult Alexander - just what he had least desired at the commencement of the interview .
" I hear you have made peace with Turkey ? "
Balash"ev bowed his head affirmatively .
" Peace has been concluded ... " he began .
But Napoleon did not let him speak .
He evidently wanted to do all the talking himself , and continued to talk with the sort of eloquence and unrestrained irritability to which spoiled people are so prone .
" Yes , I know you have made peace with the Turks without obtaining Moldavia and Wallachia ; I would have given your sovereign those provinces as I gave him Finland .
Yes , " he went on , " I promised and would have given the Emperor Alexander Moldavia and Wallachia , and now he wo n't have those splendid provinces .
Yet he might have united them to his empire and in a single reign would have extended Russia from the Gulf of Bothnia to the mouths of the Danube .
" All that , he would have owed to my friendship .
Oh , what a splendid reign ! "
he repeated several times , then paused , drew from his pocket a gold snuffbox , lifted it to his nose , and greedily sniffed at it .
" What a splendid reign the Emperor Alexander 's might have been ! "
He looked compassionately at Balash"ev , and as soon as the latter tried to make some rejoinder hastily interrupted him .
" What could he wish or look for that he would not have obtained through my friendship ? " demanded Napoleon , shrugging his shoulders in perplexity .
" But no , he has preferred to surround himself with my enemies , and with whom ?
With Steins , Armfeldts , Bennigsens , and Wintzingerodes !
the same)-"but they are not even that !
They are neither fit for war nor peace !
Barclay is said to be the most capable of them all , but I can not say so , judging by his first movements .
And what are they doing , all these courtiers ?
Pfuel proposes , Armfeldt disputes , Bennigsen considers , and Barclay , called on to act , does not know what to decide on , and time passes bringing no result .
Bagrati'on alone is a military man .
He 's stupid , but he has experience , a quick eye , and resolution ....
And what role is your young monarch playing in that monstrous crowd ?
They compromise him and throw on him the responsibility for all that happens .
A sovereign should not be with the army unless he is a general ! " said Napoleon , evidently uttering these words as a direct challenge to the Emperor .
He knew how Alexander desired to be a military commander .
" The campaign began only a week ago , and you have n't even been able to defend V'ilna .
You are cut in two and have been driven out of the Polish provinces .
Your army is grumbling . "
" On the contrary , Your Majesty , " said Balash"ev , hardly able to remember what had been said to him and following these verbal fireworks with difficulty , " the troops are burning with eagerness ... "
" I know everything ! "
Napoleon interrupted him .
" I know everything .
I know the number of your battalions as exactly as I know my own .
You have not two hundred thousand men , and I have three times that number .
I give you my word of honor , " said Napoleon , forgetting that his word of honor could carry no weight-"I
give you my word of honor that I have five hundred and thirty thousand men this side of the Vistula .
The Turks will be of no use to you ; they are worth nothing and have shown it by making peace with you .
As for the Swedes - it is their fate to be governed by mad kings .
Their king was insane and they changed him for another - Bernadotte , who promptly went mad - for no Swede would ally himself with Russia unless he were mad . "
Napoleon grinned maliciously and again raised his snuffbox to his nose .
Balash"ev knew how to reply to each of Napoleon 's remarks , and would have done so ; he continually made the gesture of a man wishing to say something , but Napoleon always interrupted him .
To the alleged insanity of the Swedes , Balash"ev wished to reply that when Russia is on her side Sweden is practically an island : but Napoleon gave an angry exclamation to drown his voice .
Napoleon was in that state of irritability in which a man has to talk , talk , and talk , merely to convince himself that he is in the right .
He knew that none of the words now uttered by Napoleon had any significance , and that Napoleon himself would be ashamed of them when he came to his senses .
Balash"ev stood with downcast eyes , looking at the movements of Napoleon 's stout legs and trying to avoid meeting his eyes .
" But what do I care about your allies ? " said Napoleon .
" I have allies - the Poles .
There are eighty thousand of them and they fight like lions .
And there will be two hundred thousand of them . "
Yes , I will throw you back beyond the Dv'ina and beyond the Dnieper , and will re - erect against you that barrier which it was criminal and blind of Europe to allow to be destroyed .
Yes , that is what will happen to you .
That is what you have gained by alienating me ! "
And he walked silently several times up and down the room , his fat shoulders twitching .
He put his snuffbox into his waistcoat pocket , took it out again , lifted it several times to his nose , and stopped in front of Balash"ev .
He paused , looked ironically straight into Balash"ev 's eyes , and said in a quiet voice :
" And yet what a splendid reign your master might have had ! "
Balash"ev , feeling it incumbent on him to reply , said that from the Russian side things did not appear in so gloomy a light .
Napoleon was silent , still looking derisively at him and evidently not listening to him .
Balash"ev said that in Russia the best results were expected from the war .
Napoleon nodded condescendingly , as if to say , " I know it 's your duty to say that , but you do n't believe it yourself .
I have convinced you . "
When Balash"ev had ended , Napoleon again took out his snuffbox , sniffed at it , and stamped his foot twice on the floor as a signal .
The door opened , a gentleman - in - waiting , bending respectfully , handed the Emperor his hat and gloves ; another brought him a pocket handkerchief .
Napoleon , without giving them a glance , turned to Balash"ev :
" Assure the Emperor Alexander from me , " said he , taking his hat , " that I am as devoted to him as before :
I know him thoroughly and very highly esteem his lofty qualities .
I will detain you no longer , General ; you shall receive my letter to the Emperor . "
And Napoleon went quickly to the door .
Everyone in the reception room rushed forward and descended the staircase .
CHAPTER VII
But , to his surprise , Balash"ev received , through Duroc , an invitation to dine with the Emperor that day .
Bessi`eres , Caulaincourt , and Berthier were present at that dinner .
Napoleon met Balash"ev cheerfully and amiably .
He not only showed no sign of constraint or self - reproach on account of his outburst that morning , but , on the contrary , tried to reassure Balash"ev .
The Emperor was in very good spirits after his ride through V'ilna , where crowds of people had rapturously greeted and followed him .
From all the windows of the streets through which he rode , rugs , flags , and his monogram were displayed , and the Polish ladies , welcoming him , waved their handkerchiefs to him .
" How many inhabitants are there in Moscow ?
How many houses ?
Is it true that Moscow is called ' Holy Moscow ' ?
How many churches are there in Moscow ?
" he asked .
And receiving the reply that there were more than two hundred churches , he remarked :
" Why such a quantity of churches ? "
" The Russians are very devout , " replied Balash"ev .
" But a large number of monasteries and churches is always a sign of the backwardness of a people , " said Napoleon , turning to Caulaincourt for appreciation of this remark .
Balash"ev respectfully ventured to disagree with the French Emperor .
" Every country has its own character , " said he .
" But nowhere in Europe is there anything like that , " said Napoleon .
" I beg your Majesty 's pardon , " returned Balash"ev , " besides Russia there is Spain , where there are also many churches and monasteries . "
The uninterested and perplexed faces of the marshals showed that they were puzzled as to what Balash"ev 's tone suggested .
" If there is a point we do n't see it , or it is not at all witty , " their expressions seemed to say .
So little was his rejoinder appreciated that Napoleon did not notice it at all and na"ively asked Balash"ev through what towns the direct road from there to Moscow passed .
Balash"ev involuntarily flushed with pleasure at the aptitude of this reply , but hardly had he uttered the word Polt'ava before Caulaincourt began speaking of the badness of the road from Petersburg to Moscow and of his Petersburg reminiscences .
After dinner they went to drink coffee in Napoleon 's study , which four days previously had been that of the Emperor Alexander .
Napoleon sat down , toying with his S`evres coffee cup , and motioned Balash"ev to a chair beside him .
Napoleon was in that well - known after - dinner mood which , more than any reasoned cause , makes a man contented with himself and disposed to consider everyone his friend .
It seemed to him that he was surrounded by men who adored him : and he felt convinced that , after his dinner , Balash"ev too was his friend and worshiper .
Napoleon turned to him with a pleasant , though slightly ironic , smile .
" They tell me this is the room the Emperor Alexander occupied ?
Strange , is n't it , General ? "
he said , evidently not doubting that this remark would be agreeable to his hearer since it went to prove his , Napoleon 's , superiority to Alexander .
Balash"ev made no reply and bowed his head in silence .
" Yes .
Four days ago in this room , Wintzingerode and Stein were deliberating , " continued Napoleon with the same derisive and self - confident smile .
" What I ca n't understand , " he went on , " is that the Emperor Alexander has surrounded himself with my personal enemies .
That I do not ... understand .
Has he not thought that I may do the same ? "
and he turned inquiringly to Balash"ev , and evidently this thought turned him back on to the track of his morning 's anger , which was still fresh in him .
" And let him know that I will do so ! " said Napoleon , rising and pushing his cup away with his hand .
" I 'll drive all his W"urttemberg , Baden , and Weimar relations out of Germany ....
Yes .
I 'll drive them out .
Let him prepare an asylum for them in Russia ! "
Balash"ev bowed his head with an air indicating that he would like to make his bow and leave , and only listened because he could not help hearing what was said to him .
Napoleon did not notice this expression ; he treated Balash"ev not as an envoy from his enemy , but as a man now fully devoted to him and who must rejoice at his former master 's humiliation .
" And why has the Emperor Alexander taken command of the armies ?
What is the good of that ?
War is my profession , but his business is to reign and not to command armies !
Why has he taken on himself such a responsibility ? "
To have one 's ear pulled by the Emperor was considered the greatest honor and mark of favor at the French court .
Are the horses ready for the general ? "
he added , with a slight inclination of his head in reply to Balash"ev 's bow . "
Let him have mine , he has a long way to go ! "
The letter taken by Balash"ev was the last Napoleon sent to Alexander .
Every detail of the interview was communicated to the Russian monarch , and the war began ....
CHAPTER VIII
After his interview with Pierre in Moscow , Prince Andrew went to Petersburg , on business as he told his family , but really to meet Anatole Kur'agin whom he felt it necessary to encounter .
On reaching Petersburg he inquired for Kur'agin but the latter had already left the city .
Pierre had warned his brother - in - law that Prince Andrew was on his track .
Anatole Kur'agin promptly obtained an appointment from the Minister of War and went to join the army in Moldavia .
So Prince Andrew , having received an appointment on the headquarters staff , left for Turkey .
Prince Andrew did not think it proper to write and challenge Kur'agin .
He thought that if he challenged him without some fresh cause it might compromise the young Countess Rost'ova and so he wanted to meet Kur'agin personally in order to find a fresh pretext for a duel .
But he again failed to meet Kur'agin in Turkey , for soon after Prince Andrew arrived , the latter returned to Russia .
In a new country , amid new conditions , Prince Andrew found life easier to bear .
He was now concerned only with the nearest practical matters unrelated to his past interests , and he seized on these the more eagerly the more those past interests were closed to him .
Of the activities that presented themselves to him , army service was the simplest and most familiar .
As a general on duty on Kut'uzov 's staff , he applied himself to business with zeal and perseverance and surprised Kut'uzov by his willingness and accuracy in work .
Before joining the Western Army which was then , in May , encamped at Drissa , Prince Andrew visited Bald Hills which was directly on his way , being only two miles off the Smol'ensk highroad .
He entered through the gates with their stone pillars and drove up the avenue leading to the house as if he were entering an enchanted , sleeping castle .
Princess Mary was still the same timid , plain maiden getting on in years , uselessly and joylessly passing the best years of her life in fear and constant suffering .
Mademoiselle Bourienne was the same coquettish , self - satisfied girl , enjoying every moment of her existence and full of joyous hopes for the future .
She had merely become more self - confident , Prince Andrew thought .
Dessalles , the tutor he had brought from Switzerland , was wearing a coat of Russian cut and talking broken Russian to the servants , but was still the same narrowly intelligent , conscientious , and pedantic preceptor .
Little Nicholas alone had changed .
He had grown , become rosier , had curly dark hair , and , when merry and laughing , quite unconsciously lifted the upper lip of his pretty little mouth just as the little princess used to do .
He alone did not obey the law of immutability in the enchanted , sleeping castle .
But though externally all remained as of old , the inner relations of all these people had changed since Prince Andrew had seen them last .
The household was divided into two alien and hostile camps , who changed their habits for his sake and only met because he was there .
To the one camp belonged the old prince , Mademoiselle Bourienne , and the architect ; to the other Princess Mary , Dessalles , little Nicholas , and all the old nurses and maids .
Involuntarily feeling this at dinner on the first day , he was taciturn , and the old prince noticing this also became morosely dumb and retired to his apartments directly after dinner .
The old prince said that if he was ill it was only because of Princess Mary : that she purposely worried and irritated him , and that by indulgence and silly talk she was spoiling little Prince Nicholas .
The old prince knew very well that he tormented his daughter and that her life was very hard , but he also knew that he could not help tormenting her and that she deserved it . "
Why does Prince Andrew , who sees this , say nothing to me about his sister ?
Does he think me a scoundrel , or an old fool who , without any reason , keeps his own daughter at a distance and attaches this Frenchwoman to himself ?
He does n't understand , so I must explain it , and he must hear me out , " thought the old prince .
And he began explaining why he could not put up with his daughter 's unreasonable character .
If there is any misunderstanding and discord between you and Mary , I ca n't blame her for it at all .
I know how she loves and respects you .
Since you ask me , " continued Prince Andrew , becoming irritable - as he was always liable to do of late-"I
can only say that if there are any misunderstandings they are caused by that worthless woman , who is not fit to be my sister 's companion . "
The old man at first stared fixedly at his son , and an unnatural smile disclosed the fresh gap between his teeth to which Prince Andrew could not get accustomed .
" What companion , my dear boy ?
Eh ?
You 've already been talking it over !
Eh ? "
Let not a trace of you remain here ! ... "
Prince Andrew wished to leave at once , but Princess Mary persuaded him to stay another day .
That day he did not see his father , who did not leave his room and admitted no one but Mademoiselle Bourienne and T'ikhon , but asked several times whether his son had gone .
Next day , before leaving , Prince Andrew went to his son 's rooms .
The boy , curly - headed like his mother and glowing with health , sat on his knee , and Prince Andrew began telling him the story of Bluebeard , but fell into a reverie without finishing the story .
He thought not of this pretty child , his son whom he held on his knee , but of himself .
He sought in himself either remorse for having angered his father or regret at leaving home for the first time in his life on bad terms with him , and was horrified to find neither .
What meant still more to him was that he sought and did not find in himself the former tenderness for his son which he had hoped to reawaken by caressing the boy and taking him on his knee .
" Well , go on ! " said his son .
Prince Andrew , without replying , put him down from his knee and went out of the room .
" So you 've decided to go , Andrew ? " asked his sister .
" Thank God that I can , " replied Prince Andrew .
" I am very sorry you ca n't . "
" Why do you say that ? " replied Princess Mary .
" Why do you say that , when you are going to this terrible war , and he is so old ?
Mademoiselle Bourienne says he has been asking about you .... "
As soon as she began to speak of that , her lips trembled and her tears began to fall .
Prince Andrew turned away and began pacing the room .
" Ah , my God !
my God !
When one thinks who and what - what trash - can cause people misery ! " he said with a malignity that alarmed Princess Mary .
She understood that when speaking of " trash " he referred not only to Mademoiselle Bourienne , the cause of her misery , but also to the man who had ruined his own happiness .
" Andrew !
One thing I beg , I entreat of you !
" she said , touching his elbow and looking at him with eyes that shone through her tears .
" I understand you " ( she looked down ) .
" Do n't imagine that sorrow is the work of men .
Men are His tools .
" She looked a little above Prince Andrew 's head with the confident , accustomed look with which one looks at the place where a familiar portrait hangs . "
Sorrow is sent by Him , not by men .
Men are His instruments , they are not to blame .
If you think someone has wronged you , forget it and forgive !
We have no right to punish .
And then you will know the happiness of forgiving . "
" If I were a woman I would do so , Mary .
That is a woman 's virtue .
But a man should not and can not forgive and forget , " he replied , and though till that moment he had not been thinking of Kur'agin , all his unexpended anger suddenly swelled up in his heart .
" If Mary is already persuading me to forgive , it means that I ought long ago to have punished him , " he thought .
And giving her no further reply , he began thinking of the glad vindictive moment when he would meet Kur'agin who he knew was now in the army .
" Good - by , Andrew !
Remember that misfortunes come from God , and men are never to blame , " were the last words he heard from his sister when he took leave of her .
" Then it must be so ! " thought Prince Andrew as he drove out of the avenue from the house at Bald Hills . "
She , poor innocent creature , is left to be victimized by an old man who has outlived his wits .
The old man feels he is guilty , but can not change himself .
My boy is growing up and rejoices in life , in which like everybody else he will deceive or be deceived .
And I am off to the army .
Why ?
I myself do n't know .
I want to meet that man whom I despise , so as to give him a chance to kill and laugh at me ! "
These conditions of life had been the same before , but then they were all connected , while now they had all tumbled to pieces .
Only senseless things , lacking coherence , presented themselves one after another to Prince Andrew 's mind .
CHAPTER IX
Prince Andrew reached the general headquarters of the army at the end of June .
Prince Andrew found Barclay de Tolly , to whom he had been assigned , on the bank of the Drissa .
Barclay de Tolly was quartered nearly three miles from the Emperor .
He received Bolk'onski stiffly and coldly and told him in his foreign accent that he would mention him to the Emperor for a decision as to his employment , but asked him meanwhile to remain on his staff .
Anatole Kur'agin , whom Prince Andrew had hoped to find with the army , was not there .
He had gone to Petersburg , but Prince Andrew was glad to hear this .
His mind was occupied by the interests of the center that was conducting a gigantic war , and he was glad to be free for a while from the distraction caused by the thought of Kur'agin .
But the question whether the camp was advantageous or disadvantageous remained for him undecided .
While the Emperor had still been at V'ilna , the forces had been divided into three armies .
First , the army under Barclay de Tolly , secondly , the army under Bagrati'on , and thirdly , the one commanded by Torm'asov .
The Emperor was with the first army , but not as commander in chief .
In the orders issued it was stated , not that the Emperor would take command , but only that he would be with the army .
The Emperor , moreover , had with him not a commander in chief 's staff but the imperial headquarters staff .
It was this : the Emperor did not assume the title of commander in chief , but disposed of all the armies ; the men around him were his assistants .
Arakch'eev was a faithful custodian to enforce order and acted as the sovereign 's bodyguard .
Bennigsen was a landlord in the V'ilna province who appeared to be doing the honors of the district , but was in reality a good general , useful as an adviser and ready at hand to replace Barclay .
The Grand Duke was there because it suited him to be .
The ex - Minister Stein was there because his advice was useful and the Emperor Alexander held him in high esteem personally .
Armfeldt virulently hated Napoleon and was a general full of self - confidence , a quality that always influenced Alexander .
Paulucci was there because he was bold and decided in speech .
Among the opinions and voices in this immense , restless , brilliant , and proud sphere , Prince Andrew noticed the following sharply defined subdivisions of tendencies and parties :
The first party consisted of Pfuel and his adherents - military theorists who believed in a science of war with immutable laws - laws of oblique movements , outflankings , and so forth .
To this party belonged the foreign nobles , Wolzogen , Wintzingerode , and others , chiefly Germans .
The second party was directly opposed to the first ; one extreme , as always happens , was met by representatives of the other .
The members of this party were those who had demanded an advance from V'ilna into Poland and freedom from all prearranged plans .
Besides being advocates of bold action , this section also represented nationalism , which made them still more one - sided in the dispute .
They were Russians : Bagrati'on , Erm'olov ( who was beginning to come to the front ) , and others .
At that time a famous joke of Erm'olov 's was being circulated , that as a great favor he had petitioned the Emperor to make him a German .
To the third party - in which the Emperor had most confidence - belonged the courtiers who tried to arrange compromises between the other two .
The members of this party , chiefly civilians and to whom Arakch'eev belonged , thought and said what men who have no convictions but wish to seem to have some generally say .
They insisted on the retention of the camp at Drissa , according to Pfuel 's plan , but on changing the movements of the other armies .
Though , by this course , neither one aim nor the other could be attained , yet it seemed best to the adherents of this third party .
The men of this party had both the quality and the defect of frankness in their opinions .
They feared Napoleon , recognized his strength and their own weakness , and frankly said so .
They said : " Nothing but sorrow , shame , and ruin will come of all this !
We have abandoned V'ilna and V'itebsk and shall abandon Drissa .
The only reasonable thing left to do is to conclude peace as soon as possible , before we are turned out of Petersburg . "
This view was very general in the upper army circles and found support also in Petersburg and from the chancellor , Rumy'antsev , who , for other reasons of state , was in favor of peace .
The fifth party consisted of those who were adherents of Barclay de Tolly , not so much as a man but as minister of war and commander in chief . "
Be he what he may " ( they always began like that ) , " he is an honest , practical man and we have nobody better .
Give him real power , for war can not be conducted successfully without unity of command , and he will show what he can do , as he did in Finland .
If our army is well organized and strong and has withdrawn to Drissa without suffering any defeats , we owe this entirely to Barclay .
If Barclay is now to be superseded by Bennigsen all will be lost , for Bennigsen showed his incapacity already in 1807 . "
Let the others make mistakes now ! " said they , arguing that our retirement to Drissa was a most shameful reverse and an unbroken series of blunders .
" The more mistakes that are made the better .
It will at any rate be understood all the sooner that things can not go on like this .
What is wanted is not some Barclay or other , but
a man like Bennigsen , who made his mark in 1807 , and to whom Napoleon himself did justice - a man whose authority would be willingly recognized , and Bennigsen is the only such man . "
In the troubled waters of conflicting and intersecting intrigues that eddied about the Emperor 's headquarters , it was possible to succeed in many ways unthinkable at other times .
A third , in the absence of opponents , between two councils would simply solicit a special gratuity for his faithful services , well knowing that at that moment people would be too busy to refuse him .
A fourth while seemingly overwhelmed with work would often come accidentally under the Emperor 's eye .
From among all these parties , just at the time Prince Andrew reached the army , another , a ninth party , was being formed and was beginning to raise its voice .
CHAPTER X
News was received at the Emperor 's quarters that very day of a fresh movement by Napoleon which might endanger the army - news subsequently found to be false .
Prince Andrew arrived at Bennigsen 's quarters - a country gentleman 's house of moderate size , situated on the very banks of the river .
Chern'yshev was sitting at a window in the first room with a French novel in his hand .
This room had probably been a music room ; there was still an organ in it on which some rugs were piled , and in one corner stood the folding bedstead of Bennigsen 's adjutant .
This adjutant was also there and sat dozing on the rolled - up bedding , evidently exhausted by work or by feasting .
Two doors led from the room , one straight on into what had been the drawing room , and another , on the right , to the study .
Through the first door came the sound of voices conversing in German and occasionally in French .
In that drawing room were gathered , by the Emperor 's wish , not a military council ( the Emperor preferred indefiniteness ) , but certain persons whose opinions he wished to know in view of the impending difficulties .
It was not a council of war , but , as it were , a council to elucidate certain questions for the Emperor personally .
Prince Andrew had an opportunity of getting a good look at him , for Pfuel arrived soon after himself and , in passing through to the drawing room , stopped a minute to speak to Chern'yshev .
There was about him something of Weyrother , Mack , and Schmidt , and many other German theorist - generals whom Prince Andrew had seen in 1805 , but he was more typical than any of them .
Prince Andrew had never yet seen a German theorist in whom all the characteristics of those others were united to such an extent .
Pfuel was short and very thin but broad - boned , of coarse , robust build , broad in the hips , and with prominent shoulder blades .
His face was much wrinkled and his eyes deep set .
His hair had evidently been hastily brushed smooth in front of the temples , but stuck up behind in quaint little tufts .
He entered the room , looking restlessly and angrily around , as if afraid of everything in that large apartment .
Awkwardly holding up his sword , he addressed Chern'yshev and asked in German where the Emperor was .
He nodded hurriedly in reply to Chern'yshev , and smiled ironically on hearing that the sovereign was inspecting the fortifications that he , Pfuel , had planned in accord with his theory .
Prince Andrew did not catch what he said and would have passed on , but Chern'yshev introduced him to Pfuel , remarking that Prince Andrew was just back from Turkey where the war had terminated so fortunately .
Pfuel , always inclined to be irritably sarcastic , was particularly disturbed that day , evidently by the fact that they had dared to inspect and criticize his camp in his absence .
From this short interview with Pfuel , Prince Andrew , thanks to his Austerlitz experiences , was able to form a clear conception of the man .
A Frenchman is self - assured because he regards himself personally , both in mind and body , as irresistibly attractive to men and women .
An Italian is self - assured because he is excitable and easily forgets himself and other people .
A Russian is self - assured just because he knows nothing and does not want to know anything , since he does not believe that anything can be known .
Pfuel was evidently of that sort .
Pfuel was one of those theoreticians who so love their theory that they lose sight of the theory 's object - its practical application .
His love of theory made him hate everything practical , and he would not listen to it .
He was even pleased by failures , for failures resulting from deviations in practice from the theory only proved to him the accuracy of his theory .
The unbrushed tufts of hair sticking up behind and the hastily brushed hair on his temples expressed this most eloquently .
He passed into the next room , and the deep , querulous sounds of his voice were at once heard from there .
CHAPTER XI
The Emperor was following him , and Bennigsen had hastened on to make some preparations and to be ready to receive the sovereign .
Chern'yshev and Prince Andrew went out into the porch , where the Emperor , who looked fatigued , was dismounting .
Marquis Paulucci was talking to him with particular warmth and the Emperor , with his head bent to the left , was listening with a dissatisfied air .
The Emperor moved forward evidently wishing to end the conversation , but the flushed and excited Italian , oblivious of decorum , followed him and continued to speak .
Without heeding the end of the Italian 's remarks , and as though not hearing them , the Emperor , recognizing Bolk'onski , addressed him graciously .
" I am very glad to see you !
Go in there where they are meeting , and wait for me . "
The Emperor went into the study .
He was followed by Prince Peter Mikh'aylovich Volk'onski and Baron Stein , and the door closed behind them .
Prince Andrew , taking advantage of the Emperor 's permission , accompanied Paulucci , whom he had known in Turkey , into the drawing room where the council was assembled .
Prince Peter Mikh'aylovich Volk'onski occupied the position , as it were , of chief of the Emperor 's staff .
He came out of the study into the drawing room with some maps which he spread on a table , and put questions on which he wished to hear the opinion of the gentlemen present .
What had happened was that news ( which afterwards proved to be false ) had been received during the night of a movement by the French to outflank the Drissa camp .
The first to speak was General Armfeldt who , to meet the difficulty that presented itself , unexpectedly proposed a perfectly new position away from the Petersburg and Moscow roads .
The reason for this was inexplicable ( unless he wished to show that he , too , could have an opinion ) , but he urged that at this point the army should unite and there await the enemy .
It was one of the millions of proposals , one as good as another , that could be made as long as it was quite unknown what character the war would take .
Some disputed his arguments , others defended them .
In these voluminous notes Toll suggested another scheme , totally different from Armfeldt 's or Pfuel 's plan of campaign .
During all these discussions Pfuel and his interpreter , Wolzogen ( his " bridge " in court relations ) , were silent .
Pfuel only snorted contemptuously and turned away , to show that he would never demean himself by replying to such nonsense as he was now hearing .
So when Prince Volk'onski , who was in the chair , called on him to give his opinion , he merely said :
" Why ask me ?
General Armfeldt has proposed a splendid position with an exposed rear , or why not this Italian gentleman 's attack - very fine , or a retreat , also good !
Why ask me ? " said he .
" Why , you yourselves know everything better than I do . "
But when Volk'onski said , with a frown , that it was in the Emperor 's name that he asked his opinion , Pfuel rose and , suddenly growing animated , began to speak :
" Everything has been spoiled , everything muddled , everybody thought they knew better than I did , and now you come to me !
How mend matters ?
There is nothing to mend !
The principles laid down by me must be strictly adhered to , " said he , drumming on the table with his bony fingers .
" What is the difficulty ?
Nonsense , childishness ! "
Paulucci , who did not know German , began questioning him in French .
He kept laughing sarcastically , he demonstrated , and at last contemptuously ceased to demonstrate , like a mathematician who ceases to prove in various ways the accuracy of a problem that has already been proved .
Wolzogen took his place and continued to explain his views in French , every now and then turning to Pfuel and saying , " Is it not so , your excellency ? "
But Pfuel , like a man heated in a fight who strikes those on his own side , shouted angrily at his own supporter , Wolzogen :
" Well , of course , what more is there to explain ? "
Paulucci and Michaud both attacked Wolzogen simultaneously in French .
Armfeldt addressed Pfuel in German .
Toll explained to Volk'onski in Russian .
Prince Andrew listened and observed in silence .
Of all these men Prince Andrew sympathized most with Pfuel , angry , determined , and absurdly self - confident as he was .
He was ridiculous , and unpleasantly sarcastic , but yet he inspired involuntary respect by his boundless devotion to an idea .
Everything was assumed to be possible for Napoleon , they expected him from every side , and invoked his terrible name to shatter each other 's proposals .
Pfuel alone seemed to consider Napoleon a barbarian like everyone else who opposed his theory .
But besides this feeling of respect , Pfuel evoked pity in Prince Andrew .
And despite his self - confidence and grumpy German sarcasm he was pitiable , with his hair smoothly brushed on the temples and sticking up in tufts behind .
Prince Andrew , listening to this polyglot talk and to these surmises , plans , refutations , and shouts , felt nothing but amazement at what they were saying .
What theory and science is possible about a matter the conditions and circumstances of which are unknown and can not be defined , especially when the strength of the acting forces can not be ascertained ?
No one was or is able to foresee in what condition our or the enemy 's armies will be in a day 's time , and no one can gauge the force of this or that detachment .
And why do they all speak of a ' military genius ' ?
Is a man a genius who can order bread to be brought up at the right time and say who is to go to the right and who to the left ?
It is only because military men are invested with pomp and power and crowds of sychophants flatter power , attributing to it qualities of genius it does not possess .
The best generals I have known were , on the contrary , stupid or absent - minded men .
Bagrati'on was the best , Napoleon himself admitted that .
And of Bonaparte himself !
I remember his limited , self - satisfied face on the field of Austerlitz .
Not only does a good army commander not need any special qualities , on the contrary he needs the absence of the highest and best human attributes - love , poetry , tenderness , and philosophic inquiring doubt .
He should be limited , firmly convinced that what he is doing is very important ( otherwise he will not have sufficient patience ) , and only then will he be a brave leader .
God forbid that he should be humane , should love , or pity , or think of what is just and unjust .
It is understandable that a theory of their ' genius ' was invented for them long ago because they have power !
The success of a military action depends not on them , but on the man in the ranks who shouts , ' We are lost ! '
or who shouts , ' Hurrah ! '
And only in the ranks can one serve with assurance of being useful . "
So thought Prince Andrew as he listened to the talking , and he roused himself only when Paulucci called him and everyone was leaving .
CHAPTER XII
On receiving this letter , Nicholas did not even make any attempt to get leave of absence or to retire from the army , but wrote to his parents that he was sorry
Nat'asha was ill and her engagement broken off , and that he would do all he could to meet their wishes .
To S'onya he wrote separately .
" Adored friend of my soul ! " he wrote .
" Nothing but honor could keep me from returning to the country .
But this shall be our last separation .
Believe me , directly the war is over , if I am still alive and still loved by you , I will throw up everything and fly to you , to press you forever to my ardent breast . "
It was , in fact , only the commencement of the campaign that prevented Rost'ov from returning home as he had promised and marrying S'onya .
A splendid wife , children , a good pack of hounds , a dozen leashes of smart borzois , agriculture , neighbors , service by election ... " thought he .
But now the campaign was beginning , and he had to remain with his regiment .
And since it had to be so , Nicholas Rost'ov , as was natural to him , felt contented with the life he led in the regiment and was able to find pleasure in that life .
On his return from his furlough Nicholas , having been joyfully welcomed by his comrades , was sent to obtain remounts and brought back from the Ukraine excellent horses which pleased him and earned him commendation from his commanders .
During his absence he had been promoted captain , and when the regiment was put on war footing with an increase in numbers , he was again allotted his old squadron .
The troops retired from V'ilna for various complicated reasons of state , political and strategic .
Each step of the retreat was accompanied by a complicated interplay of interests , arguments , and passions at headquarters .
For the P'avlograd hussars , however , the whole of this retreat during the finest period of summer and with sufficient supplies was a very simple and agreeable business .
It was only at headquarters that there was depression , uneasiness , and intriguing ; in the body of the army they did not ask themselves where they were going or why .
If they regretted having to retreat , it was only because they had to leave billets they had grown accustomed to , or some pretty young Polish lady .
First they camped gaily before V'ilna , making acquaintance with the Polish landowners , preparing for reviews and being reviewed by the Emperor and other high commanders .
Then came an order to retreat to Sventsy'ani and destroy any provisions they could not carry away with them .
From Sventsy'ani they retired farther and farther to Drissa , and thence again beyond Drissa , drawing near to the frontier of Russia proper .
On the thirteenth of July the P'avlograds took part in a serious action for the first time .
On the twelfth of July , on the eve of that action , there was a heavy storm of rain and hail .
In general , the summer of 1812 was remarkable for its storms .
The two P'avlograd squadrons were bivouacking on a field of rye , which was already in ear but had been completely trodden down by cattle and horses .
The rain was descending in torrents , and Rost'ov , with a young officer named Ily'in , his prot'eg'e , was sitting in a hastily constructed shelter .
An officer of their regiment , with long mustaches extending onto his cheeks , who after riding to the staff had been overtaken by the rain , entered Rost'ov 's shelter .
" I have come from the staff , Count .
Have you heard of Ra'evski 's exploit ? "
And the officer gave them details of the Salt'anov battle , which he had heard at the staff .
Rost'ov , smoking his pipe and turning his head about as the water trickled down his neck , listened inattentively , with an occasional glance at Ily'in , who was pressing close to him .
This officer , a lad of sixteen who had recently joined the regiment , was now in the same relation to Nicholas that Nicholas had been to Den'isov seven years before .
Ily'in tried to imitate Rost'ov in everything and adored him as a girl might have done .
Zdrzhinski , the officer with the long mustache , spoke grandiloquently of the Salt'anov dam being " a Russian Thermopylae , " and of how a deed worthy of antiquity had been performed by General Ra'evski .
He recounted how Ra'evski had led his two sons onto the dam under terrific fire and had charged with them beside him .
Rost'ov heard the story and not only said nothing to encourage Zdrzhinski 's enthusiasm but , on the contrary , looked like a man ashamed of what he was hearing , though with no intention of contradicting it .
Rost'ov looked at him in silence . "
And even those who did see it would not have been much stimulated by it , for what had they to do with Ra'evski 's tender paternal feelings when their own skins were in danger ?
And besides , the fate of the Fatherland did not depend on whether they took the Salt'anov dam or not , as we are told was the case at Thermopylae .
So why should he have made such a sacrifice ?
And why expose his own children in the battle ?
But he did not express his thoughts , for in such matters , too , he had gained experience .
He knew that this tale redounded to the glory of our arms and so one had to pretend not to doubt it .
And he acted accordingly .
" I ca n't stand this any more , " said Ily'in , noticing that Rost'ov did not relish Zdrzhinski 's conversation .
" My stockings and shirt ... and the water is running on my seat !
I 'll go and look for shelter .
The rain seems less heavy . "
Ily'in went out and Zdrzhinski rode away .
Five minutes later Ily'in , splashing through the mud , came running back to the shanty .
" Hurrah ! Rost'ov , come quick !
I 've found it !
About two hundred yards away there 's a tavern where ours have already gathered .
We can at least get dry there , and Mary Hendr'ikhovna 's there . "
Mary Hendr'ikhovna was the wife of the regimental doctor , a pretty young German woman he had married in Poland .
" Rost'ov , where are you ? "
" Here .
What lightning ! "
they called to one another .
CHAPTER XIII
In the tavern , before which stood the doctor 's covered cart , there were already some five officers .
Mary Hendr'ikhovna , a plump little blonde German , in a dressing jacket and nightcap , was sitting on a broad bench in the front corner .
Her husband , the doctor , lay asleep behind her .
Rost'ov and Ily'in , on entering the room , were welcomed with merry shouts and laughter .
" Dear me , how jolly we are ! " said Rost'ov laughing .
" And why do you stand there gaping ? "
" What swells they are !
Why , the water streams from them !
Do n't make our drawing room so wet . "
" Do n't mess Mary Hendr'ikhovna 's dress ! "
cried other voices .
Rost'ov and Ily'in hastened to find a corner where they could change into dry clothes without offending Mary Hendr'ikhovna 's modesty .
A fire was made up in the dilapidated brick stove .
" Leave him alone , " said Mary Hendr'ikhovna , smiling timidly and happily . "
He is sleeping well as it is , after a sleepless night . "
" Oh , no , Mary Hendr'ikhovna , " replied the officer , " one must look after the doctor .
Perhaps he 'll take pity on me someday , when it comes to cutting off a leg or an arm for me . "
All the officers appeared to be , and really were , in love with her that evening .
Even those playing cards behind the partition soon left their game and came over to the samovar , yielding to the general mood of courting Mary Hendr'ikhovna .
There was only one spoon , sugar was more plentiful than anything else , but it took too long to dissolve , so it was decided that Mary Hendr'ikhovna should stir the sugar for everyone in turn .
Rost'ov received his tumbler , and adding some rum to it asked Mary Hendr'ikhovna to stir it .
" But you take it without sugar ? "
she said , smiling all the time , as if everything she said and everything the others said was very amusing and had a double meaning .
" It is not the sugar I want , but only that your little hand should stir my tea . "
Mary Hendr'ikhovna assented and began looking for the spoon which someone meanwhile had pounced on .
" Use your finger , Mary Hendr'ikhovna , it will be still nicer , " said Rost'ov .
" Too hot ! " she replied , blushing with pleasure .
Ily'in put a few drops of rum into the bucket of water and brought it to Mary Hendr'ikhovna , asking her to stir it with her finger .
" This is my cup , " said he .
" Only dip your finger in it
and I 'll drink it all up . "
When they had emptied the samovar , Rost'ov took a pack of cards and proposed that they should play " Kings " with Mary Hendr'ikhovna .
They drew lots to settle who should make up her set .
" Well , but supposing Mary Hendr'ikhovna is ' King ' ? " asked Ily'in .
" As it is , she is Queen , and her word is law ! "
They had hardly begun to play before the doctor 's disheveled head suddenly appeared from behind Mary Hendr'ikhovna .
He had been awake for some time , listening to what was being said , and evidently found nothing entertaining or amusing in what was going on .
His face was sad and depressed .
Without greeting the officers , he scratched himself and asked to be allowed to pass as they were blocking the way .
As soon as he had left the room all the officers burst into loud laughter and Mary Hendr'ikhovna blushed till her eyes filled with tears and thereby became still more attractive to them .
" But I 'll send an orderly ....
Two of them ! "
said Rost'ov .
" What an idea , doctor ! "
" I 'll stand guard on it myself ! " said Ily'in .
Seeing his gloomy face as he frowned at his wife , the officers grew still merrier , and some of them could not refrain from laughter , for which they hurriedly sought plausible pretexts .
Several times Rost'ov , covering his head , tried to go to sleep , but some remark would arouse him and conversation would be resumed , to the accompaniment of unreasoning , merry , childlike laughter .
CHAPTER XIV
It was nearly three o'clock but no one was yet asleep , when the quartermaster appeared with an order to move on to the little town of Ostr'ovna .
Still laughing and talking , the officers began hurriedly getting ready and again boiled some muddy water in the samovar .
But Rost'ov went off to his squadron without waiting for tea .
Day was breaking , the rain had ceased , and the clouds were dispersing .
It felt damp and cold , especially in clothes that were still moist .
" She really is a dear little thing , " said Rost'ov to Ily'in , who was following him .
" A charming woman ! " said Ily'in , with all the gravity of a boy of sixteen .
Half an hour later the squadron was lined up on the road .
The command was heard to " mount " and the soldiers crossed themselves and mounted .
Tattered , blue - purple clouds , reddening in the east , were scudding before the wind .
It was growing lighter and lighter .
The soldiers ' faces were more and more clearly visible .
Rost'ov , always closely followed by Ily'in , rode along the side of the road between two rows of birch trees .
When campaigning , Rost'ov allowed himself the indulgence of riding not a regimental but a Cossack horse .
To ride this horse was a pleasure to him , and he thought of the horse , of the morning , of the doctor 's wife , but not once of the impending danger .
Formerly , when going into action , Rost'ov had felt afraid ; now he had not the least feeling of fear .
He was fearless , not because he had grown used to being under fire ( one can not grow used to danger ) , but because he had learned how to manage his thoughts when in danger .
He had grown accustomed when going into action to think about anything but what would seem most likely to interest him - the impending danger .
During the first period of his service , hard as he tried and much as he reproached himself with cowardice , he had not been able to do this , but with time it had come of itself .
He glanced with pity at the excited face of Ily'in , who talked much and in great agitation .
He knew from experience the tormenting expectation of terror and death the cornet was suffering and knew that only time could help him .
The whole sun appeared on the horizon and disappeared behind a long narrow cloud that hung above it .
A few minutes later it reappeared brighter still from behind the top of the cloud , tearing its edge .
Everything grew bright and glittered .
And with that light , and as if in reply to it , came the sound of guns ahead of them .
Before Rost'ov had had time to consider and determine the distance of that firing , Count Ostermann - Tolst'oy 's adjutant came galloping from V'itebsk with orders to advance at a trot along the road .
The squadron overtook and passed the infantry and the battery - which had also quickened their pace - rode down a hill , and passing through an empty and deserted village again ascended .
The horses began to lather and the men to flush .
" Halt !
Dress your ranks ! "
the order of the regimental commander was heard ahead .
" Forward by the left .
Walk , march ! "
came the order from in front .
And the hussars , passing along the line of troops on the left flank of our position , halted behind our Uhlans who were in the front line .
To the right stood our infantry in a dense column : they were the reserve .
Higher up the hill , on the very horizon , our guns were visible through the wonderfully clear air , brightly illuminated by slanting morning sunbeams .
In front , beyond a hollow dale , could be seen the enemy 's columns and guns .
Our advanced line , already in action , could be heard briskly exchanging shots with the enemy in the dale .
At these sounds , long unheard , Rost'ov 's spirits rose , as at the strains of the merriest music .
Trap - ta - ta - tap ! cracked the shots , now together , now several quickly one after another .
Again all was silent and then again it sounded as if someone were walking on detonators and exploding them .
The hussars remained in the same place for about an hour .
A cannonade began .
Count Ostermann with his suite rode up behind the squadron , halted , spoke to the commander of the regiment , and rode up the hill to the guns .
After Ostermann had gone , a command rang out to the Uhlans .
" Form column !
Prepare to charge ! "
The infantry in front of them parted into platoons to allow the cavalry to pass .
The Uhlans started , the streamers on their spears fluttering , and trotted downhill toward the French cavalry which was seen below to the left .
As soon as the Uhlans descended the hill , the hussars were ordered up the hill to support the battery .
As they took the places vacated by the Uhlans , bullets came from the front , whining and whistling , but fell spent without taking effect .
The sounds , which he had not heard for so long , had an even more pleasurable and exhilarating effect on Rost'ov than the previous sounds of firing .
Drawing himself up , he viewed the field of battle opening out before him from the hill , and with his whole soul followed the movement of the Uhlans .
CHAPTER XV
Rost'ov , with his keen sportsman 's eye , was one of the first to catch sight of these blue French dragoons pursuing our Uhlans .
Nearer and nearer in disorderly crowds came the Uhlans and the French dragoons pursuing them .
He could already see how these men , who looked so small at the foot of the hill , jostled and overtook one another , waving their arms and their sabers in the air .
Rost'ov gazed at what was happening before him as at a hunt .
He looked around .
A captain , standing beside him , was gazing like himself with eyes fixed on the cavalry below them .
" Andrew Sevasty'anych ! "
said Rost'ov .
" You know , we could crush them .... "
" A fine thing too ! " replied the captain , " and really ... "
Rost'ov himself did not know how or why he did it .
He acted as he did when hunting , without reflecting or considering .
He saw the dragoons near and that they were galloping in disorder ; he knew they could not withstand an attack - knew there was only that moment and that if he let it slip it would not return .
The bullets were whining and whistling so stimulatingly around him and his horse was so eager to go that he could not restrain himself .
He touched his horse , gave the word of command , and immediately , hearing behind him the tramp of the horses of his deployed squadron , rode at full trot downhill toward the dragoons .
Hardly had they reached the bottom of the hill before their pace instinctively changed to a gallop , which grew faster and faster as they drew nearer to our Uhlans and the French dragoons who galloped after them .
The dragoons were now close at hand .
On seeing the hussars , the foremost began to turn , while those behind began to halt .
With the same feeling with which he had galloped across the path of a wolf , Rost'ov gave rein to his Don'ets horse and galloped to intersect the path of the dragoons ' disordered lines .
One Uhlan stopped , another who was on foot flung himself to the ground to avoid being knocked over , and a riderless horse fell in among the hussars .
Nearly all the French dragoons were galloping back .
Rost'ov , picking out one on a gray horse , dashed after him .
On the way he came upon a bush , his gallant horse cleared it , and almost before he had righted himself in his saddle he saw that he would immediately overtake the enemy he had selected .
That Frenchman , by his uniform an officer , was going at a gallop , crouching on his gray horse and urging it on with his saber .
The instant he had done this , all Rost'ov 's animation vanished .
The officer fell , not so much from the blow - which had but slightly cut his arm above the elbow - as from the shock to his horse and from fright .
Rost'ov reined in his horse , and his eyes sought his foe to see whom he had vanquished .
The French dragoon officer was hopping with one foot on the ground , the other being caught in the stirrup .
His eyes , screwed up with fear as if he every moment expected another blow , gazed up at Rost'ov with shrinking terror .
Before Rost'ov had decided what to do with him , the officer cried , " I surrender ! "
He hurriedly but vainly tried to get his foot out of the stirrup and did not remove his frightened blue eyes from Rost'ov 's face .
Some hussars who galloped up disengaged his foot and helped him into the saddle .
In front , the French infantry were firing as they ran .
The hussars galloped hastily back with their prisoners .
Rost'ov galloped back with the rest , aware of an unpleasant feeling of depression in his heart .
Something vague and confused , which he could not at all account for , had come over him with the capture of that officer and the blow he had dealt him .
Count Ostermann - Tolst'oy met the returning hussars , sent for Rost'ov , thanked him , and said he would report his gallant deed to the Emperor and would recommend him for a St. George 's Cross .
When sent for by Count Ostermann , Rost'ov , remembering that he had charged without orders , felt sure his commander was sending for him to punish him for breach of discipline .
Ostermann 's flattering words and promise of a reward should therefore have struck him all the more pleasantly , but he still felt that same vaguely disagreeable feeling of moral nausea . "
But what on earth is worrying me ?
" he asked himself as he rode back from the general . "
Ily'in ?
No , he 's safe .
Have I disgraced myself in any way ?
No , that 's not it . "
Something else , resembling remorse , tormented him . "
Yes ,
oh yes , that French officer with the dimple .
And I remember how my arm paused when I raised it . "
Rost'ov saw the prisoners being led away and galloped after them to have a look at his Frenchman with the dimple on his chin .
He was sitting in his foreign uniform on an hussar packhorse and looked anxiously about him .
The sword cut on his arm could scarcely be called a wound .
He glanced at Rost'ov with a feigned smile and waved his hand in greeting .
Rost'ov still had the same indefinite feeling , as of shame .
All that day and the next his friends and comrades noticed that Rost'ov , without being dull or angry , was silent , thoughtful , and preoccupied .
He drank reluctantly , tried to remain alone , and kept turning something over in his mind .
So others are even more afraid than I am ! " he thought . "
So that 's all there is in what is called heroism !
And did I do it for my country 's sake ?
And how was he to blame , with his dimple and blue eyes ?
And how frightened he was !
He thought that I should kill him .
Why should I kill him ?
My hand trembled .
And they have given me a St. George 's Cross ....
I ca n't make it out at all . "
But while Nicholas was considering these questions and still could reach no clear solution of what puzzled him so , the wheel of fortune in the service , as often happens , turned in his favor .
After the affair at Ostr'ovna he was brought into notice , received command of an hussar battalion , and when a brave officer was needed he was chosen .
CHAPTER XVI
She was so ill that it was impossible for them to consider in how far she was to blame for what had happened .
She could not eat or sleep , grew visibly thinner , coughed , and , as the doctors made them feel , was in danger .
They could not think of anything but how to help her .
But , above all , that thought was kept out of their minds by the fact that they saw they were really useful , as in fact they were to the whole Rost'ov family .
They satisfied that eternal human need for hope of relief , for sympathy , and that something should be done , which is felt by those who are suffering .
They satisfied the need seen in its most elementary form in a child , when it wants to have a place rubbed that has been hurt .
A child knocks itself and runs at once to the arms of its mother or nurse to have the aching spot rubbed or kissed , and it feels better when this is done .
What would the countess have done had she not been able sometimes to scold the invalid for not strictly obeying the doctor 's orders ?
" You 'll never get well like that , " she would say , forgetting her grief in her vexation , " if you wo n't obey the doctor and take your medicine at the right time !
And it was even pleasant to be able to show , by disregarding the orders , that she did not believe in medical treatment and did not value her life .
The doctor came every day , felt her pulse , looked at her tongue , and regardless of her grief - stricken face joked with her .
And the countess , trying to conceal the action from herself and from him , slipped a gold coin into his hand and always returned to the patient with a more tranquil mind .
The symptoms of Nat'asha 's illness were that she ate little , slept little , coughed , and was always low - spirited .
The doctors said that she could not get on without medical treatment , so they kept her in the stifling atmosphere of the town , and the Rost'ovs did not move to the country that summer of 1812 .
Nat'asha 's grief began to be overlaid by the impressions of daily life , it ceased to press so painfully on her heart , it gradually faded into the past , and she began to recover physically .
CHAPTER XVII
Nat'asha was calmer but no happier .
She not merely avoided all external forms of pleasure - balls , promenades , concerts , and theaters - but she never laughed without a sound of tears in her laughter .
She could not sing .
Laughter and singing in particular seemed to her like a blasphemy , in face of her sorrow .
Without any need of self - restraint , no wish to coquet ever entered her head .
She said and felt at that time that no man was more to her than Nast'asya Iv'anovna , the buffoon .
Something stood sentinel within her and forbade her every joy .
Besides , she had lost all the old interests of her carefree girlish life that had been so full of hope .
The previous autumn , the hunting , " Uncle , " and the Christmas holidays spent with Nicholas at Otr'adnoe were what she recalled oftenest and most painfully .
What would she not have given to bring back even a single day of that time !
But it was gone forever .
Her presentiment at the time had not deceived her - that that state of freedom and readiness for any enjoyment would not return again .
Yet it was necessary to live on .
It comforted her to reflect that she was not better as she had formerly imagined , but worse , much worse , than anybody else in the world .
But this was not enough .
She knew that , and asked herself , " What next ? "
But there was nothing to come .
There was no joy in life , yet life was passing .
Nat'asha apparently tried not to be a burden or a hindrance to anyone , but wanted nothing for herself .
She kept away from everyone in the house and felt at ease only with her brother P'etya .
She liked to be with him better than with the others , and when alone with him she sometimes laughed .
She hardly ever left the house and of those who came to see them was glad to see only one person , Pierre .
It would have been impossible to treat her with more delicacy , greater care , and at the same time more seriously than did Count Bez'ukhov .
Nat'asha unconsciously felt this delicacy and so found great pleasure in his society .
Sometimes Nat'asha noticed embarrassment and awkwardness on his part in her presence , especially when he wanted to do something to please her , or feared that something they spoke of would awaken memories distressing to her .
She noticed this and attributed it to his general kindness and shyness , which she imagined must be the same toward everyone as it was to her .
Before the end of the fast of St. Peter , Agraf'ena Iv'anovna Bel'ova , a country neighbor of the Rost'ovs , came to Moscow to pay her devotions at the shrines of the Moscow saints .
She suggested that Nat'asha should fast and prepare for Holy Communion , and Nat'asha gladly welcomed the idea .
Agraf'ena Iv'anovna used to come to wake Nat'asha at three in the morning , but generally found her already awake .
She was afraid of being late for Matins .
Hastily washing , and meekly putting on her shabbiest dress and an old mantilla , Nat'asha , shivering in the fresh air , went out into the deserted streets lit by the clear light of dawn .
By Agraf'ena Iv'anovna 's advice Nat'asha prepared herself not in their own parish , but at a church where , according to the devout Agraf'ena Iv'anovna , the priest was a man of very severe and lofty life .
When she understood them her personal feeling became interwoven in the prayers with shades of its own .
She crossed herself , bowed low , and when she did not understand , in horror at her own vileness , simply asked God to forgive her everything , everything , to have mercy upon her .
The prayers to which she surrendered herself most of all were those of repentance .
During the whole week she spent in this way , that feeling grew every day .
The doctor who came to see her that day ordered her to continue the powders he had prescribed a fortnight previously .
" She must certainly go on taking them morning and evening , " said he , evidently sincerely satisfied with his success .
" Only , please be particular about it .
" Be quite easy , " he continued playfully , as he adroitly took the gold coin in his palm . "
She will soon be singing and frolicking about .
The last medicine has done her a very great deal of good .
She has freshened up very much . "
The countess , with a cheerful expression on her face , looked down at her nails and spat a little for luck as she returned to the drawing room .
CHAPTER XVIII
And as up to the eleventh of July no manifesto or appeal had been received , exaggerated reports became current about them and about the position of Russia .
It was said that the Emperor was leaving the army because it was in danger , it was said that Smol'ensk had surrendered , that Napoleon had an army of a million and only a miracle could save Russia .
That Sunday , the Rost'ovs went to Mass at the Razum'ovskis ' private chapel as usual .
It was a hot July day .
As Nat'asha , at her mother 's side , passed through the crowd behind a liveried footman who cleared the way for them , she heard a young man speaking about her in too loud a whisper .
" That 's Rost'ova , the one who ... "
" She 's much thinner , but all the same she 's pretty ! "
She heard , or thought she heard , the names of Kur'agin and Bolk'onski .
But she was always imagining that .
It always seemed to her that everyone who looked at her was thinking only of what had happened to her .
With a sinking heart , wretched as she always was now when she found herself in a crowd ,
Nat'asha in her lilac silk dress trimmed with black lace walked - as women can walk - with the more repose and stateliness the greater the pain and shame in her soul .
She knew for certain that she was pretty , but this no longer gave her satisfaction as it used to .
On the contrary it tormented her more than anything else of late , and particularly so on this bright , hot summer day in town .
I 'm pretty ,
I 'm young , and I know that now I am good .
I used to be bad , but now I know I am good , " she thought , " but yet my best years are slipping by and are no good to anyone . "
She stood by her mother 's side and exchanged nods with acquaintances near her .
A comely , fresh - looking old man was conducting the service with that mild solemnity which has so elevating and soothing an effect on the souls of the worshipers .
The gates of the sanctuary screen were closed , the curtain was slowly drawn , and from behind it a soft mysterious voice pronounced some words .
Tears , the cause of which she herself did not understand , made Nat'asha 's breast heave , and a joyous but oppressive feeling agitated her .
" Teach me what I should do , how to live my life , how I may grow good forever , forever ! " she pleaded .
" In peace let us pray unto the Lord . "
" As one community , without distinction of class , without enmity , united by brotherly love - let us pray ! " thought Nat'asha .
" For the peace that is from above , and for the salvation of our souls . "
" For the world of angels and all the spirits who dwell above us , " prayed Nat'asha .
When they prayed for the warriors , she thought of her brother and Den'isov .
When they prayed for all traveling by land and sea , she remembered Prince Andrew , prayed for him , and asked God to forgive her all the wrongs she had done him .
When they prayed for those who hate us , she tried to think of her enemies and people who hated her , in order to pray for them .
Only at prayer did she feel able to think clearly and calmly of Prince Andrew and Anatole , as men for whom her feelings were as nothing compared with her awe and devotion to God .
When he had finished the Litany the deacon crossed the stole over his breast and said , " Let us commit ourselves and our whole lives to Christ the Lord ! "
" Commit ourselves to God , " Nat'asha inwardly repeated . "
Lord God , I submit myself to Thy will !
" she thought .
" I want nothing , wish for nothing ; teach me what to do and how to use my will !
Take me , take me ! "
The countess looked round several times at her daughter 's softened face and shining eyes and prayed God to help her .
The priest came out with his purple velvet biretta on his head , adjusted his hair , and knelt down with an effort .
Everybody followed his example and they looked at one another in surprise .
Then came the prayer just received from the Synod - a prayer for the deliverance of Russia from hostile invasion .
" Lord God of might , God of our salvation !
Look this day in mercy and blessing on Thy humble people , and graciously hear us , spare us , and have mercy upon us !
How long , O Lord , how long shall the wicked triumph ?
How long shall they wield unlawful power ?
" Lord God !
Preserve his army , put a bow of brass in the hands of those who have armed themselves in Thy Name , and gird their loins with strength for the fight .
Lord , Thou art able to save both great and small ; Thou art God , and man can not prevail against Thee !
" God of our fathers !
Amen . "
In Nat'asha 's receptive condition of soul this prayer affected her strongly .
She shared with all her heart in the prayer for the spirit of righteousness , for the strengthening of the heart by faith and hope , and its animation by love .
But she could not pray that her enemies might be trampled under foot when but a few minutes before she had been wishing she had more of them that she might pray for them .
But neither could she doubt the righteousness of the prayer that was being read on bended knees .
And it seemed to her that God heard her prayer .
CHAPTER XIX
That terrible question "
Why ? "
" Wherefore ? " which had come to him amid every occupation , was now replaced , not by another question or by a reply to the former question , but by her image .
Whatever worldly baseness presented itself to him , he said to himself :
" Well , supposing N. N. has swindled the country and the Tsar , and the country and the Tsar confer honors upon him , what does that matter ?
She smiled at me yesterday and asked me to come again , and I love her , and no one will ever know it . "
And his soul felt calm and peaceful .
He felt that the condition he was in could not continue long , that a catastrophe was coming which would change his whole life , and he impatiently sought everywhere for signs of that approaching catastrophe .
One of his brother Masons had revealed to Pierre the following prophecy concerning Napoleon , drawn from the Revelation of St. John .
In chapter 13 , verse 18 , of the Apocalypse , it is said :
Here is wisdom .
Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast : for it is the number of a man ; and his number is Six hundred threescore and six .
And in the fifth verse of the same chapter :
And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies ; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months .
The French alphabet , written out with the same numerical values as the Hebrew , in which the first nine letters denote units and the others tens , will have the following significance :
a    b    c    d    e    f   
g   
h    i    k 1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9    10 l    
m    
n     o     p     q     r    
s
20    30   
40   
50   
60    70    80    90 t     u     v     w    
x    
y 100  
110  
120   130  
140  
150 z 160
Writing the words L'Empereur Napol'eon in numbers , it appears that the sum of them is 666 , and that Napoleon was therefore the beast foretold in the Apocalypse .
He wrote the words L'Empereur Alexandre , La nation russe and added up their numbers , but the sums were either more or less than 666 .
Once when making such calculations he wrote down his own name in French , Comte Pierre Besouhoff , but the sum of the numbers did not come right .
Then he changed the spelling , substituting a z for the s and adding de and the article le , still without obtaining the desired result .
Then it occurred to him : if the answer to the question were contained in his name , his nationality would also be given in the answer .
So he wrote Le russe Besuhof and adding up the numbers got 671 .
This was only five too much , and five was represented by e , the very letter elided from the article le before the word Empereur .
By omitting the e , though incorrectly , Pierre got the answer he sought .
L'russe Besuhof made 666 .
This discovery excited him .
How , or by what means , he was connected with the great event foretold in the Apocalypse he did not know , but he did not doubt that connection for a moment .
His love for Nat'asha , Antichrist , Napoleon , the invasion , the comet , 666 , L'Empereur Napol'eon , and L'russe Besuhof -
all this had to mature and culminate , to lift him out of that spellbound , petty sphere of Moscow habits in which he felt himself held captive and lead him to a great achievement and great happiness .
* Forty - two .
In the morning , when he went to call at Rostopch'in 's he met there a courier fresh from the army , an acquaintance of his own , who often danced at Moscow balls .
" Do , please , for heaven 's sake , relieve me of something ! " said the courier .
" I have a sackful of letters to parents . "
Among these letters was one from Nicholas Rost'ov to his father .
Pierre took that letter , and Rostopch'in also gave him the Emperor 's appeal to Moscow , which had just been printed , the last army orders , and his own most recent bulletin .
CHAPTER XX
A few intimate friends were dining with the Rost'ovs that day , as usual on Sundays .
Pierre came early so as to find them alone .
He had grown so stout this year that he would have been abnormal had he not been so tall , so broad of limb , and so strong that he carried his bulk with evident ease .
He went up the stairs , puffing and muttering something .
His coachman did not even ask whether he was to wait .
He knew that when his master was at the Rost'ovs ' he stayed till midnight .
The Rost'ovs ' footman rushed eagerly forward to help him off with his cloak and take his hat and stick .
Pierre , from club habit , always left both hat and stick in the anteroom .
The first person he saw in the house was Nat'asha .
Even before he saw her , while taking off his cloak , he heard her .
She was practicing solfa exercises in the music room .
He knew that she had not sung since her illness , and so the sound of her voice surprised and delighted him .
He opened the door softly and saw her , in the lilac dress she had worn at church , walking about the room singing .
She had her back to him when he opened the door , but when , turning quickly , she saw his broad , surprised face , she blushed and came rapidly up to him .
" I want to try to sing again , " she said , adding as if by way of excuse , " it is , at least , something to do . "
" That 's capital ! "
" How glad I am you 've come !
I am so happy today , " she said , with the old animation Pierre had not seen in her for a long time .
" You know Nicholas has received a St. George 's Cross ?
I am so proud of him . "
" Oh yes , I sent that announcement .
But I do n't want to interrupt you , " he added , and was about to go to the drawing room .
Nat'asha stopped him .
" Count , is it wrong of me to sing ? " she said blushing , and fixing her eyes inquiringly on him .
" No ... Why should it be ?
On the contrary ...
But why do you ask me ? "
" I do n't know myself , " Nat'asha answered quickly , " but I should not like to do anything you disapproved of .
I believe in you completely .
You do n't know how important you are to me , how much you 've done for me ....
" She spoke rapidly and did not notice how Pierre flushed at her words .
" I saw in that same army order that he , Bolk'onski " ( she whispered the name hastily ) , " is in Russia , and in the army again .
What do you think ?"-
she was speaking hurriedly , evidently afraid her strength might fail her-"Will he ever forgive me ?
Will he not always have a bitter feeling toward me ?
What do you think ?
What do you think ? "
" I think ... " Pierre replied , " that he has nothing to forgive ....
If I were in his place ... "
But she did not give him time to say them .
" Yes , you ... you ...
" she said , uttering the word
you
rapturously-"that 's a different thing .
I know no one kinder , more generous , or better than you ; nobody could be !
Had you not been there then , and now too , I do n't know what would have become of me , because ... "
Tears suddenly rose in her eyes , she turned away , lifted her music before her eyes , began singing again , and again began walking up and down the room .
Just then P'etya came running in from the drawing room .
P'etya was now a handsome rosy lad of fifteen with full red lips and resembled Nat'asha .
He was preparing to enter the university , but he and his friend Obol'enski had lately , in secret , agreed to join the hussars .
P'etya had come rushing out to talk to his namesake about this affair .
He had asked Pierre to find out whether he would be accepted in the hussars .
Pierre walked up and down the drawing room , not listening to what P'etya was saying .
P'etya pulled him by the arm to attract his attention .
" Well , what about my plan ?
Peter Kir'ilych , for heaven 's sake !
You are my only hope , " said P'etya .
" Oh yes , your plan .
To join the hussars ?
I 'll mention it
, I 'll bring it all up today . "
" Well , mon cher , have you got the manifesto ? "
asked the old count .
" The countess has been to Mass at the Razum'ovskis ' and heard the new prayer .
She says it 's very fine . "
" Yes , I 've got it , " said Pierre .
" The Emperor is to be here tomorrow ... there 's to be an Extraordinary Meeting of the nobility , and they are talking of a levy of ten men per thousand .
Oh yes , let me congratulate you ! "
" Yes , yes , thank God !
Well , and what news from the army ? "
" We are again retreating .
They say we 're already near Smol'ensk , " replied Pierre .
" O Lord , O Lord ! " exclaimed the count .
" Where is the manifesto ? "
" The Emperor 's appeal ?
Oh yes ! "
Pierre began feeling in his pockets for the papers , but could not find them .
Still slapping his pockets , he kissed the hand of the countess who entered the room and glanced uneasily around , evidently expecting Nat'asha , who had left off singing but had not yet come into the drawing room .
" On my word , I do n't know what I 've done with it , " he said .
" There he is , always losing everything ! " remarked the countess .
Nat'asha entered with a softened and agitated expression of face and sat down looking silently at Pierre .
As soon as she entered , Pierre 's features , which had been gloomy , suddenly lighted up , and while still searching for the papers he glanced at her several times .
" No , really ! I 'll drive home , I must have left them there .
I 'll certainly ... "
" But you 'll be late for dinner . "
" Oh ! And my coachman has gone . "
But S'onya , who had gone to look for the papers in the anteroom , had found them in Pierre 's hat , where he had carefully tucked them under the lining .
Pierre was about to begin reading .
" No , after dinner , " said the old count , evidently expecting much enjoyment from that reading .
" People are being arrested ... " said the count .
" I 've told the countess she should not speak French so much .
It 's not the time for it now . "
" And have you heard ? "
Shinsh'in asked .
" Prince Gol'itsyn has engaged a master to teach him Russian .
It is becoming dangerous to speak French in the streets . "
" And how about you , Count Peter Kir'ilych ?
If they call up the militia , you too will have to mount a horse , " remarked the old count , addressing Pierre .
Pierre had been silent and preoccupied all through dinner , seeming not to grasp what was said .
He looked at the count .
" Oh yes , the war , " he said .
" No ! What sort of warrior should I make ?
And yet everything is so strange , so strange !
I ca n't make it out .
I do n't know , I am very far from having military tastes , but in these times no one can answer for himself . "
After dinner the count settled himself comfortably in an easy chair and with a serious face asked S'onya , who was considered an excellent reader , to read the appeal .
" To Moscow , our ancient Capital !
" The enemy has entered the borders of Russia with immense forces .
He comes to despoil our beloved country . "
S'onya read painstakingly in her high - pitched voice .
The count listened with closed eyes , heaving abrupt sighs at certain passages .
Nat'asha sat erect , gazing with a searching look now at her father and now at Pierre .
Pierre felt her eyes on him and tried not to look round .
The countess shook her head disapprovingly and angrily at every solemn expression in the manifesto .
In all these words she saw only that the danger threatening her son would not soon be over .
May the ruin he hopes to bring upon us recoil on his own head , and may Europe delivered from bondage glorify the name of Russia ! "
" Yes , that 's it ! "
Before Shinsh'in had time to utter the joke he was ready to make on the count 's patriotism , Nat'asha jumped up from her place and ran to her father .
" What a darling our Papa is ! " she cried , kissing him , and she again looked at Pierre with the unconscious coquetry that had returned to her with her better spirits .
" There ! Here 's a patriot for you ! " said Shinsh'in .
" Not a patriot at all , but simply ... " Nat'asha replied in an injured tone .
" Everything seems funny to you , but this is n't at all a joke .... "
" A joke indeed ! " put in the count . "
Let him but say the word and we 'll all go ....
We 're not Germans ! "
" But did you notice , it says , ' for consultation ' ? " said Pierre .
" Never mind what it 's for .... "
At this moment , P'etya , to whom nobody was paying any attention , came up to his father with a very flushed face and said in his breaking voice that was now deep and now shrill :
" Well , Papa , I tell you definitely , and Mamma too , it 's as you please , but I say definitely that you must let me enter the army , because I ca n't ...
that 's all .... "
The countess , in dismay , looked up to heaven , clasped her hands , and turned angrily to her husband .
" That comes of your talking ! " said she .
But the count had already recovered from his excitement .
" Come , come ! " said he . "
Here 's a fine warrior !
No !
Nonsense !
You must study . "
" It 's not nonsense , Papa .
F'edya Obol'enski is younger than I , and he 's going too .
Besides , all the same I ca n't study now when ... " P'etya stopped short , flushed till he perspired , but still got out the words , " when our Fatherland is in danger . "
" That 'll do , that 'll do - nonsense .... "
" But you said yourself that we would sacrifice everything . "
" P'etya !
Be quiet , I tell you ! "
cried the count , with a glance at his wife , who had turned pale and was staring fixedly at her son .
" And I tell you - Peter Kir'ilych here will also tell you ... "
" Nonsense , I tell you .
Your mother 's milk has hardly dried on your lips and you want to go into the army !
There , there , I tell you , " and the count moved to go out of the room , taking the papers , probably to reread them in his study before having a nap .
" Well , Peter Kir'ilych , let 's go and have a smoke , " he said .
Pierre was agitated and undecided .
Nat'asha 's unwontedly brilliant eyes , continually glancing at him with a more than cordial look , had reduced him to this condition .
" No , I think I 'll go home . "
" Home ?
Why , you meant to spend the evening with us ....
You do n't often come nowadays as it is , and this girl of mine , " said the count good - naturedly , pointing to Nat'asha , " only brightens up when you 're here . "
" Yes , I had forgotten ...
I really must go home ...
business ... " said Pierre hurriedly .
" Well , then , au revoir ! "
said the count , and went out of the room .
" Why are you going ?
Why are you upset ? " asked Nat'asha , and she looked challengingly into Pierre 's eyes .
" Because I love you ! " was what he wanted to say , but he did not say it , and only blushed till the tears came , and lowered his eyes .
" Because it is better for me to come less often ... because ...
No , simply I have business .... "
" Why ?
No , tell me ! "
Nat'asha began resolutely and suddenly stopped .
They looked at each other with dismayed and embarrassed faces .
He tried to smile but could not : his smile expressed suffering , and he silently kissed her hand and went out .
Pierre made up his mind not to go to the Rost'ovs ' any more .
CHAPTER XXI
After the definite refusal he had received , P'etya went to his room and there locked himself in and wept bitterly .
When he came in to tea , silent , morose , and with tear - stained face , everybody pretended not to notice anything .
Next day the Emperor arrived in Moscow , and several of the Rost'ovs ' domestic serfs begged permission to go to have a look at him .
That morning P'etya was a long time dressing and arranging his hair and collar to look like a grown - up man .
He frowned before his looking glass , gesticulated , shrugged his shoulders , and finally , without saying a word to anyone , took his cap and left the house by the back door , trying to avoid notice .
While dressing , P'etya had prepared many fine things he meant to say to the gentleman - in - waiting .
But the farther he went and the more his attention was diverted by the ever - increasing crowds moving toward the Kr'emlin , the less he remembered to walk with the sedateness and deliberation of a man .
As he approached the Kr'emlin he even began to avoid being crushed and resolutely stuck out his elbows in a menacing way .
Beside P'etya stood a peasant woman , a footman , two tradesmen , and a discharged soldier .
" What are you shoving for , young lordling ?
Do n't you see we 're all standing still ?
Then why push ? "
" Anybody can shove , " said the footman , and also began working his elbows to such effect that he pushed P'etya into a very filthy corner of the gateway .
P'etya wiped his perspiring face with his hands and pulled up the damp collar which he had arranged so well at home to seem like a man 's .
He felt that he no longer looked presentable , and feared that if he were now to approach the gentlemen - in - waiting in that plight he would not be admitted to the Emperor .
But it was impossible to smarten oneself up or move to another place , because of the crowd .
One of the generals who drove past was an acquaintance of the Rost'ovs ' , and P'etya thought of asking his help , but came to the conclusion that that would not be a manly thing to do .
When the carriages had all passed in , the crowd , carrying P'etya with it , streamed forward into the Kr'emlin Square which was already full of people .
There were people not only in the square , but everywhere - on the slopes and on the roofs .
As soon as P'etya found himself in the square he clearly heard the sound of bells and the joyous voices of the crowd that filled the whole Kr'emlin .
For a while the crowd was less dense , but suddenly all heads were bared , and everyone rushed forward in one direction .
P'etya was being pressed so that he could scarcely breathe , and everybody shouted , " Hurrah ! hurrah !
hurrah ! "
P'etya stood on tiptoe and pushed and pinched , but could see nothing except the people about him .
All the faces bore the same expression of excitement and enthusiasm .
A tradesman 's wife standing beside P'etya sobbed , and the tears ran down her cheeks .
" Father !
Angel !
Dear one !
" she kept repeating , wiping away her tears with her fingers .
" Hurrah ! " was heard on all sides .
For a moment the crowd stood still , but then it made another rush forward .
" So this is what the Emperor is ! " thought P'etya .
" No , I ca n't petition him myself - that would be too bold . "
" You 've crushed the young gentleman ! " said the clerk .
" What are you up to ?
Gently ! ...
They 've crushed him , crushed him ! "
The Emperor entered the Cathedral of the Assumption .
The crowd spread out again more evenly , and the clerk led P'etya - pale and breathless - to the Tsar - cannon .
Several people were sorry for P'etya , and suddenly a crowd turned toward him and pressed round him .
Those who stood nearest him attended to him , unbuttoned his coat , seated him on the raised platform of the cannon , and reproached those others ( whoever they might be ) who had crushed him .
" One might easily get killed that way !
What do they mean by it ?
Killing people !
Poor dear , he 's as white as a sheet!"-various voices were heard saying .
P'etya no longer thought of presenting his petition .
If he could only see the Emperor he would be happy !
A tradesman 's wife was showing a rent in her shawl and telling how much the shawl had cost ; another was saying that all silk goods had now got dear .
The clerk who had rescued P'etya was talking to a functionary about the priests who were officiating that day with the bishop .
The clerk several times used the word " plenary " ( of the service ) , a word P'etya did not understand .
Two young citizens were joking with some serf girls who were cracking nuts .
All these conversations , especially the joking with the girls , were such as might have had a particular charm for P'etya at his age , but they did not interest him now .
He sat on his elevation - the pedestal of the cannon - still agitated as before by the thought of the Emperor and by his love for him .
The feeling of pain and fear he had experienced when he was being crushed , together with that of rapture , still further intensified his sense of the importance of the occasion .
Suddenly the sound of a firing of cannon was heard from the embankment , to celebrate the signing of peace with the Turks , and the crowd rushed impetuously toward the embankment to watch the firing .
P'etya too would have run there , but the clerk who had taken the young gentleman under his protection stopped him .
At last four men in uniforms and sashes emerged from the cathedral doors . "
Hurrah !
hurrah ! " shouted the crowd again .
" Which is he ?
The crowd ran after the Emperor , followed him to the palace , and began to disperse .
While the Emperor was dining , Val'uev , looking out of the window , said :
" The people are still hoping to see Your Majesty again . "
The dinner was nearly over , and the Emperor , munching a biscuit , rose and went out onto the balcony .
The people , with P'etya among them , rushed toward the balcony .
" Angel !
Dear one !
Hurrah !
Father ! ...
" cried the crowd , and P'etya with it , and again the women and men of weaker mold , P'etya among them , wept with joy .
A largish piece of the biscuit the Emperor was holding in his hand broke off , fell on the balcony parapet , and then to the ground .
A coachman in a jerkin , who stood nearest , sprang forward and snatched it up .
Several people in the crowd rushed at the coachman .
Seeing this the Emperor had a plateful of biscuits brought him and began throwing them down from the balcony .
P'etya 's eyes grew bloodshot , and still more excited by the danger of being crushed , he rushed at the biscuits .
He did not know why , but he had to have a biscuit from the Tsar 's hand and he felt that he must not give way .
P'etya pushed her hand away with his knee , seized a biscuit , and as if fearing to be too late , again shouted " Hurrah ! " with a voice already hoarse .
The Emperor went in , and after that the greater part of the crowd began to disperse .
" There ! I said if only we waited - and so it was ! " was being joyfully said by various people .
Happy as P'etya was , he felt sad at having to go home knowing that all the enjoyment of that day was over .
He did not go straight home from the Kr'emlin , but called on his friend Obol'enski , who was fifteen and was also entering the regiment .
On returning home P'etya announced resolutely and firmly that if he was not allowed to enter the service he would run away .
And next day , Count Ily'a Rost'ov - though he had not yet quite yielded - went to inquire how he could arrange for P'etya to serve where there would be least danger .
CHAPTER XXII
Two days later , on the fifteenth of July , an immense number of carriages were standing outside the Slob'oda Palace .
The great halls were full .
In the first were the nobility and gentry in their uniforms , in the second bearded merchants in full - skirted coats of blue cloth and wearing medals .
In the noblemen 's hall there was an incessant movement and buzz of voices .
The chief magnates sat on high - backed chairs at a large table under the portrait of the Emperor , but most of the gentry were strolling about the room .
The old men , dim - eyed , toothless , bald , sallow , and bloated , or gaunt and wrinkled , were especially striking .
For the most part they sat quietly in their places and were silent , or , if they walked about and talked , attached themselves to someone younger .
Pierre was there too , buttoned up since early morning in a nobleman 's uniform that had become too tight for him .
The words that had struck him in the Emperor 's appeal - that the sovereign was coming to the capital for consultation with his people - strengthened this idea .
And imagining that in this direction something important which he had long awaited was drawing near , he strolled about watching and listening to conversations , but nowhere finding any confirmation of the ideas that occupied him .
The Emperor 's manifesto was read , evoking enthusiasm , and then all moved about discussing it .
Then all preferred listening to speaking .
A middle - aged man , handsome and virile , in the uniform of a retired naval officer , was speaking in one of the rooms , and a small crowd was pressing round him .
Pierre went up to the circle that had formed round the speaker and listened .
Count Ily'a Rost'ov , in a military uniform of Catherine 's time , was sauntering with a pleasant smile among the crowd , with all of whom he was acquainted .
He too approached that group and listened with a kindly smile and nods of approval , as he always did , to what the speaker was saying .
Pierre pushed his way into the middle of the group , listened , and convinced himself that the man was indeed a liberal , but of views quite different from his own .
Bwing me my pipe !
" It was indicative of dissipation and the exercise of authority .
" What if the Smol'ensk people have offahd to waise militia for the Empewah ?
Ah we to take Smol'ensk as our patte'n ?
If the noble awistocwacy of the pwovince of Moscow thinks fit , it can show its loyalty to our sov'weign the Empewah in other ways .
Have we fo'gotten the waising of the militia in the yeah ' seven ?
All that did was to enwich the pwiests ' sons and thieves and wobbahs .... "
Count Ily'a Rost'ov smiled blandly and nodded approval .
" And was our militia of any use to the Empia ?
Not at all !
It only wuined our farming !
Bettah have another conscwiption ...
o ' ou ' men will wetu'n neithah soldiers no ' peasants , and we 'll get only depwavity fwom them .
The nobility do n't gwudge theah lives - evewy one of us will go and bwing in more wecwuits , and the sov'weign "
( that was the way he referred to the Emperor ) " need only say the word
and we 'll all die fo ' him ! "
added the orator with animation .
Count Rost'ov 's mouth watered with pleasure and he nudged Pierre , but Pierre wanted to speak himself .
He pushed forward , feeling stirred , but not yet sure what stirred him or what he would say .
Scarcely had he opened his mouth when one of the senators , a man without a tooth in his head , with a shrewd though angry expression , standing near the first speaker , interrupted him .
Evidently accustomed to managing debates and to maintaining an argument , he began in low but distinct tones :
We have been summoned to reply to the appeal with which our sovereign the Emperor has honored us .
But to judge what is best - conscription or the militia - we can leave to the supreme authority .... "
Pierre suddenly saw an outlet for his excitement .
He hardened his heart against the senator who was introducing this set and narrow attitude into the deliberations of the nobility .
Pierre stepped forward and interrupted him .
He himself did not yet know what he would say , but he began to speak eagerly , occasionally lapsing into French or expressing himself in bookish Russian .
" Excuse me , your excellency , " he began .
( He was well acquainted with the senator , but thought it necessary on this occasion to address him formally . ) "
Though I do n't agree with the gentleman ... "
( he hesitated : he wished to say , " Mon tr`es honorable pr'eopinant"-"My very honorable opponent " ) " with the gentleman ... whom I have not the honor of knowing
, I suppose that the nobility have been summoned not merely to express their sympathy and enthusiasm but also to consider the means by which we can assist our Fatherland !
* we are ready to make of ourselves - and not to obtain from us any co - co - counsel . "
* " Food for cannon . "
Many persons withdrew from the circle , noticing the senator 's sarcastic smile and the freedom of Pierre 's remarks .
Only Count Rost'ov was pleased with them as he had been pleased with those of the naval officer , the senator , and in general with whatever speech he had last heard .
But scarcely had Pierre uttered these words before he was attacked from three sides .
The most vigorous attack came from an old acquaintance , a boston player who had always been well disposed toward him , Step'an Step'anovich Adr'aksin .
Adr'aksin was in uniform , and whether as a result of the uniform or from some other cause Pierre saw before him quite a different man .
With a sudden expression of malevolence on his aged face , Adr'aksin shouted at Pierre :
" In the first place , I tell you we have no right to question the Emperor about that , and secondly , if the Russian nobility had that right , the Emperor could not answer such a question .
The troops are moved according to the enemy 's movements and the number of men increases and decreases .... "
" Yes , and this is not a time for discussing , " he continued , " but for acting : there is war in Russia !
The enemy is advancing to destroy Russia , to desecrate the tombs of our fathers , to carry off our wives and children .
" The nobleman smote his breast .
" We will all arise , everyone of us will go , for our father the Tsar ! "
he shouted , rolling his bloodshot eyes .
Several approving voices were heard in the crowd .
" We are Russians and will not grudge our blood in defense of our faith , the throne , and the Fatherland !
We must cease raving if we are sons of our Fatherland !
We will show Europe how Russia rises to the defense of Russia ! "
Pierre wished to reply , but could not get in a word .
He felt that his words , apart from what meaning they conveyed , were less audible than the sound of his opponent 's voice .
Count Rost'ov at the back of the crowd was expressing approval ; several persons , briskly turning a shoulder to the orator at the end of a phrase , said :
" That 's right , quite right !
Just so ! "
Not only was Pierre 's attempt to speak unsuccessful , but he was rudely interrupted , pushed aside , and people turned away from him as from a common enemy .
Pierre became the latter .
Many other orators spoke after the excited nobleman , and all in the same tone .
Many spoke eloquently and with originality .
Gl'inka , the editor of the Russian Messenger , who was recognized ( cries of " author !
" Yes , yes , at thunderclaps ! " was repeated approvingly in the back rows of the crowd .
With an incessant hum of voices the crowd advanced to the table .
Pressed by the throng against the high backs of the chairs , the orators spoke one after another and sometimes two together .
Those standing behind noticed what a speaker omitted to say and hastened to supply it .
Others in that heat and crush racked their brains to find some thought and hastened to utter it .
The old magnates , whom Pierre knew , sat and turned to look first at one and then at another , and their faces for the most part only expressed the fact that they found it very hot .
He did not renounce his opinions , but felt himself in some way to blame and wished to justify himself .
" I only said that it would be more to the purpose to make sacrifices when we know what is needed ! " said he , trying to be heard above the other voices .
One of the old men nearest to him looked round , but his attention was immediately diverted by an exclamation at the other side of the table .
" Yes , Moscow will be surrendered !
She will be our expiation ! " shouted one man .
" He is the enemy of mankind ! " cried another . "
Allow me to speak ....
" " Gentlemen , you are crushing me ! ... "
CHAPTER XXIII
At that moment Count Rostopch'in with his protruding chin and alert eyes , wearing the uniform of a general with sash over his shoulder , entered the room , stepping briskly to the front of the crowd of gentry .
" Our sovereign the Emperor will be here in a moment , " said Rostopch'in .
" I am straight from the palace .
Seeing the position we are in , I think there is little need for discussion .
The Emperor has deigned to summon us and the merchants .
Millions will pour forth from there "-
he pointed to the merchants '
hall-"but our business is to supply men and not spare ourselves ....
That is the least we can do ! "
A conference took place confined to the magnates sitting at the table .
The whole consultation passed more than quietly .
The secretary was told to write down the resolution of the Moscow nobility and gentry , that they would furnish ten men , fully equipped , out of every thousand serfs , as the Smol'ensk gentry had done .
Their chairs made a scraping noise as the gentlemen who had conferred rose with apparent relief , and began walking up and down , arm in arm , to stretch their legs and converse in couples .
" The Emperor !
The Emperor ! "
a sudden cry resounded through the halls and the whole throng hurried to the entrance .
The Emperor entered the hall through a broad path between two lines of nobles .
Every face expressed respectful , awe - struck curiosity .
Pierre stood rather far off and could not hear all that the Emperor said .
From what he did hear he understood that the Emperor spoke of the danger threatening the empire and of the hopes he placed on the Moscow nobility .
He was answered by a voice which informed him of the resolution just arrived at .
" Gentlemen ! " said the Emperor with a quivering voice .
There was a rustling among the crowd and it again subsided , so that Pierre distinctly heard the pleasantly human voice of the Emperor saying with emotion :
" I never doubted the devotion of the Russian nobles , but today it has surpassed my expectations .
I thank you in the name of the Fatherland !
Gentlemen , let us act !
Time is most precious .... "
The Emperor ceased speaking , the crowd began pressing round him , and rapturous exclamations were heard from all sides .
" Yes , most precious ... a royal word , " said Count Rost'ov , with a sob .
He stood at the back , and , though he had heard hardly anything , understood everything in his own way .
From the hall of the nobility the Emperor went to that of the merchants .
There he remained about ten minutes .
Pierre was among those who saw him come out from the merchants ' hall with tears of emotion in his eyes .
As became known later , he had scarcely begun to address the merchants before tears gushed from his eyes and he concluded in a trembling voice .
When Pierre saw the Emperor he was coming out accompanied by two merchants , one of whom Pierre knew , a fat
otkupshch'ik .
The other was the mayor , a man with a thin sallow face and narrow beard .
Both were weeping .
Tears filled the thin man 's eyes , and the fat otkupshch'ik sobbed outright like a child and kept repeating :
" Our lives and property - take them , Your Majesty ! "
Pierre 's one feeling at the moment was a desire to show that he was ready to go all lengths and was prepared to sacrifice everything .
He now felt ashamed of his speech with its constitutional tendency and sought an opportunity of effacing it .
Having heard that Count Mam'onov was furnishing a regiment , Bez'ukhov at once informed Rostopch'in that he would give a thousand men and their maintenance .
Old Rost'ov could not tell his wife of what had passed without tears , and at once consented to P'etya 's request and went himself to enter his name .
Next day the Emperor left Moscow .
BOOK TEN : 1812
CHAPTER I
Alexander refused negotiations because he felt himself to be personally insulted .
Barclay de Tolly tried to command the army in the best way , because he wished to fulfill his duty and earn fame as a great commander .
Such is the inevitable fate of men of action , and the higher they stand in the social hierarchy the less are they free .
The actors of 1812 have long since left the stage , their personal interests have vanished leaving no trace , and nothing remains of that time but its historic results .
The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clear to us now .
But all these hints at what happened , both from the French side and the Russian , are advanced only because they fit in with the event .
All the facts are in flat contradiction to such conjectures .
And not only was Napoleon not afraid to extend his line , but he welcomed every step forward as a triumph and did not seek battle as eagerly as in former campaigns , but very lazily .
Our Emperor joined the army to encourage it to defend every inch of Russian soil and not to retreat .
The enormous Drissa camp was formed on Pfuel 's plan , and there was no intention of retiring farther .
The Emperor reproached the commanders in chief for every step they retired .
So thought the Emperor , and the Russian commanders and people were still more provoked at the thought that our forces were retreating into the depths of the country .
Napoleon having cut our armies apart advanced far into the country and missed several chances of forcing an engagement .
In August he was at Smol'ensk and thought only of how to advance farther , though as we now see that advance was evidently ruinous to him .
The facts clearly show that Napoleon did not foresee the danger of the advance on Moscow , nor did Alexander and the Russian commanders then think of luring Napoleon on , but quite the contrary .
Everything came about fortuitously .
The armies were divided at the commencement of the campaign .
The Emperor was with the army to encourage it , but his presence and ignorance of what steps to take , and the enormous number of advisers and plans , destroyed the first army 's energy and it retired .
But as Barclay did not inspire confidence his power was limited .
And by this visit of the Emperor to Moscow the strength of the Russian army was trebled .
Barclay stood for caution .
The Tsar'evich hinted at treachery and demanded a general engagement .
At Smol'ensk the armies at last reunited , much as Bagrati'on disliked it .
Bagrati'on drove up in a carriage to the house occupied by Barclay .
Barclay donned his sash and came out to meet and report to his senior officer Bagrati'on .
Despite his seniority in rank Bagrati'on , in this contest of magnanimity , took his orders from Barclay , but , having submitted , agreed with him less than ever .
By the Emperor 's orders Bagrati'on reported direct to him .
He wrote to Arakch'eev , the Emperor 's confidant : " It must be as my sovereign pleases , but I can not work with the Minister ( meaning Barclay ) .
For God 's sake send me somewhere else if only in command of a regiment .
I can not stand it here .
Headquarters are so full of Germans that a Russian can not exist and there is no sense in anything .
I thought I was really serving my sovereign and the Fatherland , but it turns out that I am serving Barclay .
I confess I do not want to . "
The swarm of Bronn'itskis and Wintzingerodes and their like still further embittered the relations between the commanders in chief , and even less unity resulted .
Preparations were made to fight the French before Smol'ensk .
A general was sent to survey the position .
It was necessary to fight an unexpected battle at Smol'ensk to save our lines of communication .
The battle was fought and thousands were killed on both sides .
Smol'ensk was abandoned contrary to the wishes of the Emperor and of the whole people .
But Smol'ensk was burned by its own inhabitants who had been misled by their governor .
And these ruined inhabitants , setting an example to other Russians , went to Moscow thinking only of their own losses but kindling hatred of the foe .
Napoleon advanced farther and we retired , thus arriving at the very result which caused his destruction .
CHAPTER II
The day after his son had left , Prince Nicholas sent for Princess Mary to come to his study .
" Well ? Are you satisfied now ? " said he .
" You 've made me quarrel with my son !
Satisfied , are you ?
That 's all you wanted !
Satisfied ? ...
It hurts me , it hurts .
I 'm old and weak and this is what you wanted .
Well then , gloat over it !
Gloat over it ! "
After that Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week .
He was ill and did not leave his study .
Princess Mary noticed to her surprise that during this illness the old prince not only excluded her from his room , but did not admit Mademoiselle Bourienne either .
T'ikhon alone attended him .
His looks and cold tone to his daughter seemed to say : " There , you see ?
You plotted against me , you lied to Prince Andrew about my relations with that Frenchwoman and made me quarrel with him , but you see I need neither her nor you ! "
Of the war Princess Mary thought as women do think about wars .
We in Moscow are elated by enthusiasm for our adored Emperor .
" My poor husband is enduring pains and hunger in Jewish taverns , but the news which I have inspires me yet more .
" You heard probably of the heroic exploit of Ra'evski , embracing his two sons and saying : ' I will perish with them but we will not be shaken ! '
And truly though the enemy was twice stronger than we , we were unshakable .
We pass the time as we can , but in war as in war !
The chief reason Princess Mary did not realize the full significance of this war was that the old prince never spoke of it , did not recognize it , and laughed at Dessalles when he mentioned it at dinner .
The prince 's tone was so calm and confident that Princess Mary unhesitatingly believed him .
All that July the old prince was exceedingly active and even animated .
He planned another garden and began a new building for the domestic serfs .
The only thing that made Princess Mary anxious about him was that he slept very little and , instead of sleeping in his study as usual , changed his sleeping place every day .
Then again he would spend a night in the dining room .
On August 1 , a second letter was received from Prince Andrew .
In his first letter which came soon after he had left home , Prince Andrew had dutifully asked his father 's forgiveness for what he had allowed himself to say and begged to be restored to his favor .
To this letter the old prince had replied affectionately , and from that time had kept the Frenchwoman at a distance .
At dinner that day , on Dessalles ' mentioning that the French were said to have already entered V'itebsk , the old prince remembered his son 's letter .
" There was a letter from Prince Andrew today , " he said to Princess Mary-"Haven't you read it ? "
" No , Father , " she replied in a frightened voice .
She could not have read the letter as she did not even know it had arrived .
" He writes about this war , " said the prince , with the ironic smile that had become habitual to him in speaking of the present war .
" That must be very interesting , " said Dessalles .
" Prince Andrew is in a position to know ... "
" Oh , very interesting ! " said Mademoiselle Bourienne .
" Go and get it for me , " said the old prince to Mademoiselle Bourienne .
" You know - under the paperweight on the little table . "
Mademoiselle Bourienne jumped up eagerly .
" No , do n't ! "
he exclaimed with a frown .
" You go , Michael Iv'anovich . "
Michael Iv'anovich rose and went to the study .
But as soon as he had left the room the old prince , looking uneasily round , threw down his napkin and went himself .
" They ca n't do anything ... always make some muddle , " he muttered .
While he was away Princess Mary , Dessalles , Mademoiselle Bourienne , and even little Nicholas exchanged looks in silence .
The old prince returned with quick steps , accompanied by Michael Iv'anovich , bringing the letter and a plan .
These he put down beside him - not letting anyone read them at dinner .
On moving to the drawing room he handed the letter to Princess Mary and , spreading out before him the plan of the new building and fixing his eyes upon it , told her to read the letter aloud .
When she had done so Princess Mary looked inquiringly at her father .
He was examining the plan , evidently engrossed in his own ideas .
" What do you think of it , Prince ? " Dessalles ventured to ask .
" I ?
I ?
... " said the prince as if unpleasantly awakened , and not taking his eyes from the plan of the building .
" Very possibly the theater of war will move so near to us that ... "
" Ha ha ha !
The theater of war ! " said the prince .
" I have said and still say that the theater of war is Poland and the enemy will never get beyond the Niemen . "
" When the snow melts they 'll sink in the Polish swamps .
Only they could fail to see it , " the prince continued , evidently thinking of the campaign of 1807 which seemed to him so recent . "
Bennigsen should have advanced into Prussia sooner , then things would have taken a different turn ... "
" But , Prince , " Dessalles began timidly , " the letter mentions V'itebsk .... "
" Ah , the letter ?
Yes ... " replied the prince peevishly . "
Yes ...
yes ...
" His face suddenly took on a morose expression .
He paused . "
Yes , he writes that the French were beaten at ... at ... what river is it ? "
Dessalles dropped his eyes .
" The prince says nothing about that , " he remarked gently .
" Does n't he ?
But I did n't invent it myself . "
No one spoke for a long time .
" Yes ... yes ...
Well , Michael Iv'anovich , " he suddenly went on , raising his head and pointing to the plan of the building , " tell me how you mean to alter it .... "
Michael Iv'anovich went up to the plan , and the prince after speaking to him about the building looked angrily at Princess Mary and Dessalles and went to his own room .
In the evening Michael Iv'anovich , sent by the prince , came to Princess Mary for Prince Andrew 's letter which had been forgotten in the drawing room .
She gave it to him and , unpleasant as it was to her to do so , ventured to ask him what her father was doing .
" Always busy , " replied Michael Iv'anovich with a respectfully ironic smile which caused Princess Mary to turn pale .
" He 's worrying very much about the new building .
He has been reading a little , but now "- Michael Iv'anovich went on , lowering his voice-"now he 's at his desk , busy with his will , I expect .
" ( One of the prince 's favorite occupations of late had been the preparation of some papers he meant to leave at his death and which he called his " will . " )
" And Alp'atych is being sent to Smol'ensk ? " asked Princess Mary .
" Oh , yes , he has been waiting to start for some time . "
CHAPTER III
When Michael Iv'anovich went in there were tears in the prince 's eyes evoked by the memory of the time when the paper he was now reading had been written .
He took the letter from Michael Iv'anovich 's hand , put it in his pocket , folded up his papers , and called in Alp'atych who had long been waiting .
The prince had a list of things to be bought in Smol'ensk and , walking up and down the room past Alp'atych who stood by the door , he gave his instructions .
" First , notepaper - do you hear ?
Eight quires , like this sample , gilt - edged ...
it must be exactly like the sample .
Varnish , sealing wax , as in Michael Iv'anovich 's list . "
He paced up and down for a while and glanced at his notes .
" Then hand to the governor in person a letter about the deed . "
The instructions to Alp'atych took over two hours and still the prince did not let him go .
He sat down , sank into thought , closed his eyes , and dozed off .
Alp'atych made a slight movement .
" Well , go , go !
If anything more is wanted I 'll send after you . "
Alp'atych went out .
The prince again went to his bureau , glanced into it , fingered his papers , closed the bureau again , and sat down at the table to write to the governor .
It was already late when he rose after sealing the letter .
He wished to sleep , but he knew he would not be able to and that most depressing thoughts came to him in bed .
So he called T'ikhon and went through the rooms with him to show him where to set up the bed for that night .
He went about looking at every corner .
Every place seemed unsatisfactory , but worst of all was his customary couch in the study .
That couch was dreadful to him , probably because of the oppressive thoughts he had had when lying there .
It was unsatisfactory everywhere , but the corner behind the piano in the sitting room was better than other places : he had never slept there yet .
With the help of a footman T'ikhon brought in the bedstead and began putting it up .
" That 's not right !
That 's not right ! "
cried the prince , and himself pushed it a few inches from the corner and then closer in again .
" Well , at last I 've finished , now I 'll rest , " thought the prince , and let T'ikhon undress him .
He was not meditating , but only deferring the moment of making the effort to lift those legs up and turn over on the bed . "
Ugh , how hard it is !
Oh , that this toil might end and you would release me ! "
thought he .
Pressing his lips together he made that effort for the twenty - thousandth time and lay down .
But hardly had he done so before he felt the bed rocking backwards and forwards beneath him as if it were breathing heavily and jolting .
This happened to him almost every night .
He opened his eyes as they were closing .
" No peace , damn them ! "
he muttered , angry he knew not with whom . "
Ah yes , there was something else important , very important , that I was keeping till I should be in bed .
The bolts ?
No , I told him about them .
No , it was something , something in the drawing room .
Princess Mary talked some nonsense .
Dessalles , that fool , said something .
Something in my pocket - can't remember .... "
" T'ikhon , what did we talk about at dinner ? "
" About Prince Michael ... "
" Be quiet , quiet ! "
The prince slapped his hand on the table . "
Yes , I know , Prince Andrew 's letter !
Princess Mary read it .
Dessalles said something about V'itebsk .
Now I 'll read it . "
He had the letter taken from his pocket and the table - on which stood a glass of lemonade and a spiral wax candle - moved close to the bed , and putting on his spectacles he began reading .
Only now in the stillness of the night , reading it by the faint light under the green shade , did he grasp its meaning for a moment .
" The French at V'itebsk , in four days ' march they may be at Smol'ensk ; perhaps are already there !
T'ikhon ! "
T'ikhon jumped up . "
No , no , I do n't want anything ! "
he shouted .
He put the letter under the candlestick and closed his eyes .
He recalled all the words spoken at that first meeting with Pot"emkin .
" Oh , quicker , quicker !
To get back to that time and have done with all the present !
Quicker , quicker - and that they should leave me in peace ! "
CHAPTER IV
Bald Hills , Prince Nicholas Bolk'onski 's estate , lay forty miles east from Smol'ensk and two miles from the main road to Moscow .
Having received all his orders Alp'atych , wearing a white beaver hat - a present from the prince - and carrying a stick as the prince did , went out accompanied by his family .
Three well - fed roans stood ready harnessed to a small conveyance with a leather hood .
The larger bell was muffled and the little bells on the harness stuffed with paper .
The prince allowed no one at Bald Hills to drive with ringing bells ; but on a long journey Alp'atych liked to have them .
His satellites - the senior clerk , a countinghouse clerk , a scullery maid , a cook , two old women , a little pageboy , the coachman , and various domestic serfs - were seeing him off .
His daughter placed chintz - covered down cushions for him to sit on and behind his back .
His old sister - in - law popped in a small bundle , and one of the coachmen helped him into the vehicle .
" There !
There !
Women 's fuss !
Women , women ! " said Alp'atych , puffing and speaking rapidly just as the prince did , and he climbed into the trap .
After giving the clerk orders about the work to be done , Alp'atych , not trying to imitate the prince now , lifted the hat from his bald head and crossed himself three times .
" If there is anything ... come back , Y'akov Alp'atych !
For Christ 's sake think of us ! "
cried his wife , referring to the rumors of war and the enemy .
" Women , women !
Women 's fuss ! "
Having baited the horses twice on the way , he arrived at the town toward evening on the fourth of August .
Alp'atych kept meeting and overtaking baggage trains and troops on the road .
As he approached Smol'ensk he heard the sounds of distant firing , but these did not impress him .
What struck him most was the sight of a splendid field of oats in which a camp had been pitched and which was being mown down by the soldiers , evidently for fodder .
This fact impressed Alp'atych , but in thinking about his own business he soon forgot it .
All the interests of his life for more than thirty years had been bounded by the will of the prince , and he never went beyond that limit .
Everything not connected with the execution of the prince 's orders did not interest and did not even exist for Alp'atych .
He was a stout , dark , red - faced peasant in the forties , with thick lips , a broad knob of a nose , similar knobs over his black frowning brows , and a round belly .
Wearing a waistcoat over his cotton shirt , Ferap'ontov was standing before his shop which opened onto the street .
On seeing Alp'atych he went up to him .
" You 're welcome , Y'akov Alp'atych .
Folks are leaving the town , but you have come to it , " said he .
" Why are they leaving the town ? " asked Alp'atych .
" That 's what I say .
Folks are foolish !
Always afraid of the French . "
" Women 's fuss , women 's fuss ! " said Alp'atych .
" Just what I think , Y'akov Alp'atych .
What I say is : orders have been given not to let them in , so that must be right .
And the peasants are asking three rubles for carting - it is n't Christian ! "
Y'akov Alp'atych heard without heeding .
He asked for a samovar and for hay for his horses , and when he had had his tea he went to bed .
All night long troops were moving past the inn .
Next morning Alp'atych donned a jacket he wore only in town and went out on business .
It was a sunny morning and by eight o'clock it was already hot . "
A good day for harvesting , " thought Alp'atych .
From beyond the town firing had been heard since early morning .
At eight o'clock the booming of cannon was added to the sound of musketry .
Many people were hurrying through the streets and there were many soldiers , but cabs were still driving about , tradesmen stood at their shops , and service was being held in the churches as usual .
Alp'atych went to the shops , to government offices , to the post office , and to the Governor 's .
In front of the Governor 's house Alp'atych found a large number of people , Cossacks , and a traveling carriage of the Governor 's .
At the porch he met two of the landed gentry , one of whom he knew .
This man , an ex - captain of police , was saying angrily :
" It 's no joke , you know !
It 's all very well if you 're single . '
One man though undone is but one , ' as the proverb says , but with thirteen in your family and all the property ...
They 've brought us to utter ruin !
What sort of governors are they to do that ?
They ought to be hanged - the brigands ! ... "
" Oh come , that 's enough ! " said the other .
" What do I care ?
Let him hear !
We 're not dogs , " said the ex - captain of police , and looking round he noticed Alp'atych .
" Oh , Y'akov Alp'atych !
What have you come for ? "
" To see the Governor by his excellency 's order , " answered Alp'atych , lifting his head and proudly thrusting his hand into the bosom of his coat as he always did when he mentioned the prince ....
" He has ordered me to inquire into the position of affairs , " he added .
" Yes , go and find out ! " shouted the angry gentleman .
" They 've brought things to such a pass that there are no carts or anything ! ...
There it is again , do you hear ?
" said he , pointing in the direction whence came the sounds of firing .
" They 've brought us all to ruin ... the brigands ! " he repeated , and descended the porch steps .
Alp'atych swayed his head and went upstairs .
In the waiting room were tradesmen , women , and officials , looking silently at one another .
The door of the Governor 's room opened and they all rose and moved forward .
Alp'atych moved forward and next time the official came out addressed him , one hand placed in the breast of his buttoned coat , and handed him two letters .
" To his Honor Baron Asch , from General - in - Chief Prince Bolk'onski , " he announced with such solemnity and significance that the official turned to him and took the letters .
A few minutes later the Governor received Alp'atych and hurriedly said to him :
" Inform the prince and princess that I knew nothing : I acted on the highest instructions - here ... " and he handed a paper to Alp'atych . "
Still , as the prince is unwell my advice is that they should go to Moscow .
I am just starting myself .
Inform them ... "
But the Governor did not finish : a dusty perspiring officer ran into the room and began to say something in French .
The Governor 's face expressed terror .
" Go , " he said , nodding his head to Alp'atych , and began questioning the officer .
Eager , frightened , helpless glances were turned on Alp'atych when he came out of the Governor 's room .
Involuntarily listening now to the firing , which had drawn nearer and was increasing in strength , Alp'atych hurried to his inn .
The paper handed to him by the Governor said this :
" I assure you that the town of Smol'ensk is not in the slightest danger as yet and it is unlikely that it will be threatened with any .
From this you will see that you have a perfect right to reassure the inhabitants of Smol'ensk , for those defended by two such brave armies may feel assured of victory . "
( Instructions from Barclay de Tolly to Baron Asch , the civil governor of Smol'ensk , 1812 . )
People were anxiously roaming about the streets .
Carts piled high with household utensils , chairs , and cupboards kept emerging from the gates of the yards and moving along the streets .
Loaded carts stood at the house next to Ferap'ontov 's and women were wailing and lamenting as they said good - by .
A small watchdog ran round barking in front of the harnessed horses .
Alp'atych entered the innyard at a quicker pace than usual and went straight to the shed where his horses and trap were .
The coachman was asleep .
He woke him up , told him to harness , and went into the passage .
From the host 's room came the sounds of a child crying , the despairing sobs of a woman , and the hoarse angry shouting of Ferap'ontov .
The cook began running hither and thither in the passage like a frightened hen , just as Alp'atych entered .
" He 's done her to death .
Killed the mistress ! ...
Beat her ... dragged her about so ! ... "
" What for ? " asked Alp'atych .
" She kept begging to go away .
She 's a woman ! '
Take me away
, ' says she , ' do n't let me perish with my little children !
Folks , ' she says , ' are all gone , so why , ' she says , ' do n't we go ? '
And he began beating and pulling her about so ! "
At these words Alp'atych nodded as if in approval , and not wishing to hear more went to the door of the room opposite the innkeeper 's , where he had left his purchases .
Ferap'ontov came out after her , but on seeing Alp'atych adjusted his waistcoat , smoothed his hair , yawned , and followed Alp'atych into the opposite room .
" Going already ? " said he .
Alp'atych , without answering or looking at his host , sorted his packages and asked how much he owed .
" We 'll reckon up !
Well , have you been to the Governor 's ? "
asked Ferap'ontov .
" What has been decided ? "
Alp'atych replied that the Governor had not told him anything definite .
" With our business , how can we get away ? " said Ferap'ontov .
" We 'd have to pay seven rubles a cartload to Dorogob'uzh and I tell them they 're not Christians to ask it !
Seliv'anov , now , did a good stroke last Thursday - sold flour to the army at nine rubles a sack .
Will you have some tea ? "
he added .
While the horses were being harnessed Alp'atych and Ferap'ontov over their tea talked of the price of corn , the crops , and the good weather for harvesting .
" Well , it seems to be getting quieter , " remarked Ferap'ontov , finishing his third cup of tea and getting up . "
Ours must have got the best of it .
The orders were not to let them in .
So we 're in force , it seems ....
They say the other day Matthew Iv'anych Pl'atov drove them into the river M'arina and drowned some eighteen thousand in one day . "
Alp'atych collected his parcels , handed them to the coachman who had come in , and settled up with the innkeeper .
The noise of wheels , hoofs , and bells was heard from the gateway as a little trap passed out .
It was by now late in the afternoon .
Half the street was in shadow , the other half brightly lit by the sun .
Alp'atych looked out of the window and went to the door .
Suddenly the strange sound of a far - off whistling and thud was heard , followed by a boom of cannon blending into a dull roar that set the windows rattling .
He went out into the street : two men were running past toward the bridge .
From different sides came whistling sounds and the thud of cannon balls and bursting shells falling on the town .
But these sounds were hardly heard in comparison with the noise of the firing outside the town and attracted little attention from the inhabitants .
The town was being bombarded by a hundred and thirty guns which Napoleon had ordered up after four o'clock .
The people did not at once realize the meaning of this bombardment .
At first the noise of the falling bombs and shells only aroused curiosity .
The cook and a shop assistant came to the gate .
With lively curiosity everyone tried to get a glimpse of the projectiles as they flew over their heads .
Several people came round the corner talking eagerly .
" What force ! " remarked one . "
Knocked the roof and ceiling all to splinters ! "
" Routed up the earth like a pig , " said another .
" That 's grand , it bucks one up ! " laughed the first . "
Lucky you jumped aside , or it would have wiped you out ! "
Others joined those men and stopped and told how cannon balls had fallen on a house close to them .
Alp'atych was getting into his trap .
The innkeeper stood at the gate .
" What marvels ! "
she exclaimed , but hearing her master 's voice she turned back , pulling down her tucked - up skirt .
Once more something whistled , but this time quite close , swooping downwards like a little bird ; a flame flashed in the middle of the street , something exploded , and the street was shrouded in smoke .
" Scoundrel , what are you doing ? " shouted the innkeeper , rushing to the cook .
At that moment the pitiful wailing of women was heard from different sides , the frightened baby began to cry , and people crowded silently with pale faces round the cook .
The loudest sound in that crowd was her wailing .
" Oh - h - h !
Dear souls , dear kind souls !
Do n't let me die !
My good souls ! ... "
Five minutes later no one remained in the street .
The cook , with her thigh broken by a shell splinter , had been carried into the kitchen .
Alp'atych , his coachman , Ferap'ontov 's wife and children and the house porter were all sitting in the cellar , listening .
The roar of guns , the whistling of projectiles , and the piteous moaning of the cook , which rose above the other sounds , did not cease for a moment .
The mistress rocked and hushed her baby and when anyone came into the cellar asked in a pathetic whisper what had become of her husband who had remained in the street .
A shopman who entered told her that her husband had gone with others to the cathedral , whence they were fetching the wonder - working icon of Smol'ensk .
Toward dusk the cannonade began to subside .
Alp'atych left the cellar and stopped in the doorway .
The evening sky that had been so clear was clouded with smoke , through which , high up , the sickle of the new moon shone strangely .
The cook 's moans had now subsided .
On two sides black curling clouds of smoke rose and spread from the fires .
Through the streets soldiers in various uniforms walked or ran confusedly in different directions like ants from a ruined ant - hill .
Several of them ran into Ferap'ontov 's yard before Alp'atych 's eyes .
Alp'atych went out to the gate .
A retreating regiment , thronging and hurrying , blocked the street .
Noticing him , an officer said : " The town is being abandoned .
Get away , get away ! "
and then , turning to the soldiers , shouted :
" I 'll teach you to run into the yards ! "
Alp'atych went back to the house , called the coachman , and told him to set off .
Ferap'ontov 's whole household came out too , following Alp'atych and the coachman .
Inside the shed Alp'atych and the coachman arranged the tangled reins and traces of their horses with trembling hands .
As Alp'atych was driving out of the gate he saw some ten soldiers in Ferap'ontov 's open shop , talking loudly and filling their bags and knapsacks with flour and sunflower seeds .
Just then Ferap'ontov returned and entered his shop .
On seeing the soldiers he was about to shout at them , but suddenly stopped and , clutching at his hair , burst into sobs and laughter :
" Loot everything , lads !
Do n't let those devils get it ! "
he cried , taking some bags of flour himself and throwing them into the street .
Some of the soldiers were frightened and ran away , others went on filling their bags .
On seeing Alp'atych , Ferap'ontov turned to him :
" Russia is done for ! " he cried .
" Alp'atych , I 'll set the place on fire myself .
We 're done for ! ... " and Ferap'ontov ran into the yard .
Soldiers were passing in a constant stream along the street blocking it completely , so that Alp'atych could not pass out and had to wait .
Ferap'ontov 's wife and children were also sitting in a cart waiting till it was possible to drive out .
Night had come .
There were stars in the sky and the new moon shone out amid the smoke that screened it .
On the sloping descent to the Dnieper Alp'atych 's cart and that of the innkeeper 's wife , which were slowly moving amid the rows of soldiers and of other vehicles , had to stop .
In a side street near the crossroads where the vehicles had stopped , a house and some shops were on fire .
This fire was already burning itself out .
The flames now died down and were lost in the black smoke , now suddenly flared up again brightly , lighting up with strange distinctness the faces of the people crowding at the crossroads .
Black figures flitted about before the fire , and through the incessant crackling of the flames talking and shouting could be heard .
Seeing that his trap would not be able to move on for some time , Alp'atych got down and turned into the side street to look at the fire .
Soldiers were continually rushing backwards and forwards near it , and he saw two of them and a man in a frieze coat dragging burning beams into another yard across the street , while others carried bundles of hay .
Alp'atych went up to a large crowd standing before a high barn which was blazing briskly .
The walls were all on fire and the back wall had fallen in , the wooden roof was collapsing , and the rafters were alight .
The crowd was evidently watching for the roof to fall in , and Alp'atych watched for it too .
" Alp'atych ! " a familiar voice suddenly hailed the old man .
" Mercy on us !
Your excellency ! " answered Alp'atych , immediately recognizing the voice of his young prince .
Prince Andrew in his riding cloak , mounted on a black horse , was looking at Alp'atych from the back of the crowd .
" Why are you here ? " he asked .
" Your ... your excellency , " stammered Alp'atych and broke into sobs . "
Are we really lost ?
Master ! ... "
" Why are you here ? " Prince Andrew repeated .
At that moment the flames flared up and showed his young master 's pale worn face .
Alp'atych told how he had been sent there and how difficult it was to get away .
" Are we really quite lost , your excellency ? " he asked again .
Prince Andrew without replying took out a notebook and raising his knee began writing in pencil on a page he tore out .
He wrote to his sister :
" Smol'ensk is being abandoned .
Bald Hills will be occupied by the enemy within a week .
Set off immediately for Moscow .
Let me know at once when you will start .
Send by special messenger to Usvy'azh . "
Before he had had time to finish giving these instructions , a chief of staff followed by a suite galloped up to him .
" You are a colonel ? " shouted the chief of staff with a German accent , in a voice familiar to Prince Andrew .
" Houses are set on fire in your presence and you stand by !
What does this mean ?
You will answer for it ! "
Prince Andrew looked at him and without replying went on speaking to Alp'atych .
" So tell them that I shall await a reply till the tenth , and if by the tenth I do n't receive news that they have all got away
I shall have to throw up everything and come myself to Bald Hills . "
" Prince , " said Berg , recognizing Prince Andrew , " I only spoke because I have to obey orders , because I always do obey exactly ....
You must please excuse me , " he went on apologetically .
Something cracked in the flames .
The fire died down for a moment and wreaths of black smoke rolled from under the roof .
There was another terrible crash and something huge collapsed .
" Ou - rou - rou ! " yelled the crowd , echoing the crash of the collapsing roof of the barn , the burning grain in which diffused a cakelike aroma all around .
The flames flared up again , lighting the animated , delighted , exhausted faces of the spectators .
The man in the frieze coat raised his arms and shouted :
" It 's fine , lads !
Now it 's raging ...
It 's fine ! "
" That 's the owner himself , " cried several voices .
CHAPTER V
From Smol'ensk the troops continued to retreat , followed by the enemy .
On the tenth of August the regiment Prince Andrew commanded was marching along the highroad past the avenue leading to Bald Hills .
Heat and drought had continued for more than three weeks .
Each day fleecy clouds floated across the sky and occasionally veiled the sun , but toward evening the sky cleared again and the sun set in reddish - brown mist .
Heavy night dews alone refreshed the earth .
The unreaped corn was scorched and shed its grain .
The marshes dried up .
The cattle lowed from hunger , finding no food on the sun - parched meadows .
Only at night and in the forests while the dew lasted was there any freshness .
As soon as day dawned the march began .
There was no wind , and the men choked in that motionless atmosphere .
They marched with handkerchiefs tied over their noses and mouths .
When they passed through a village they all rushed to the wells and fought for the water and drank it down to the mud .
Prince Andrew was in command of a regiment , and the management of that regiment , the welfare of the men and the necessity of receiving and giving orders , engrossed him .
The burning of Smol'ensk and its abandonment made an epoch in his life .
A novel feeling of anger against the foe made him forget his own sorrow .
He was entirely devoted to the affairs of his regiment and was considerate and kind to his men and officers .
In the regiment they called him " our prince , " were proud of him and loved him .
But he was kind and gentle only to those of his regiment , to Tim'okhin and the like - people quite new to him , belonging to a different world and who could not know and understand his past .
As soon as he came across a former acquaintance or anyone from the staff , he bristled up immediately and grew spiteful , ironical , and contemptuous .
Everything that reminded him of his past was repugnant to him , and so in his relations with that former circle he confined himself to trying to do his duty and not to be unfair .
But despite this , thanks to his regiment , Prince Andrew had something to think about entirely apart from general questions .
He ordered his horse to be saddled and , leaving his regiment on the march , rode to his father 's estate where he had been born and spent his childhood .
He rode to the keeper 's lodge .
No one at the stone entrance gates of the drive and the door stood open .
Grass had already begun to grow on the garden paths , and horses and calves were straying in the English park .
Prince Andrew rode up to the hothouse ; some of the glass panes were broken , and of the trees in tubs some were overturned and others dried up .
He called for Tar'as the gardener , but no one replied .
Having gone round the corner of the hothouse to the ornamental garden , he saw that the carved garden fence was broken and branches of the plum trees had been torn off with the fruit .
An old peasant whom Prince Andrew in his childhood had often seen at the gate was sitting on a green garden seat , plaiting a bast shoe .
He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew ride up .
He was sitting on the seat the old prince used to like to sit on , and beside him strips of bast were hanging on the broken and withered branch of a magnolia .
Prince Andrew rode up to the house .
Several limes in the old garden had been cut down and a piebald mare and her foal were wandering in front of the house among the rosebushes .
The shutters were all closed , except at one window which was open .
A little serf boy , seeing Prince Andrew , ran into the house .
Alp'atych , having sent his family away , was alone at Bald Hills and was sitting indoors reading the Lives of the Saints .
On hearing that Prince Andrew had come , he went out with his spectacles on his nose , buttoning his coat , and , hastily stepping up , without a word began weeping and kissing Prince Andrew 's knee .
Then , vexed at his own weakness , he turned away and began to report on the position of affairs .
Everything precious and valuable had been removed to Boguch'arovo .
Seventy quarters of grain had also been carted away .
The hay and the spring corn , of which Alp'atych said there had been a remarkable crop that year , had been commandeered by the troops and mown down while still green .
The peasants were ruined ; some of them too had gone to Boguch'arovo , only a few remained .
Without waiting to hear him out , Prince Andrew asked :
" When did my father and sister leave ? " meaning when did they leave for Moscow .
Alp'atych , understanding the question to refer to their departure for Boguch'arovo , replied that they had left on the seventh and again went into details concerning the estate management , asking for instructions .
" Am I to let the troops have the oats , and to take a receipt for them ?
We have still six hundred quarters left , " he inquired .
" Yes , let them have it , " replied Prince Andrew .
" If you noticed some disorder in the garden , " said Alp'atych , " it was impossible to prevent it .
Three regiments have been here and spent the night , dragoons mostly .
I took down the name and rank of their commanding officer , to hand in a complaint about it . "
" Well , and what are you going to do ?
Will you stay here if the enemy occupies the place ? " asked Prince Andrew .
Alp'atych turned his face to Prince Andrew , looked at him , and suddenly with a solemn gesture raised his arm .
" He is my refuge !
His will be done ! " he exclaimed .
A group of bareheaded peasants was approaching across the meadow toward the prince .
" Well , good - by ! " said Prince Andrew , bending over to Alp'atych .
" You must go away too , take away what you can and tell the serfs to go to the Ryaz'an estate or to the one near Moscow . "
Alp'atych clung to Prince Andrew 's leg and burst into sobs .
Gently disengaging himself , the prince spurred his horse and rode down the avenue at a gallop .
On seeing the young master , the elder one with frightened look clutched her younger companion by the hand and hid with her behind a birch tree , not stopping to pick up some green plums they had dropped .
Prince Andrew turned away with startled haste , unwilling to let them see that they had been observed .
He was sorry for the pretty frightened little girl , was afraid of looking at her , and yet felt an irresistible desire to do so .
A new sensation of comfort and relief came over him when , seeing these girls , he realized the existence of other human interests entirely aloof from his own and just as legitimate as those that occupied him .
Evidently these girls passionately desired one thing - to carry away and eat those green plums without being caught - and Prince Andrew shared their wish for the success of their enterprise .
He could not resist looking at them once more .
Believing their danger past , they sprang from their ambush and , chirruping something in their shrill little voices and holding up their skirts , their bare little sunburned feet scampered merrily and quickly across the meadow grass .
Prince Andrew was somewhat refreshed by having ridden off the dusty highroad along which the troops were moving .
But not far from Bald Hills he again came out on the road and overtook his regiment at its halting place by the dam of a small pond .
It was past one o'clock .
The sun , a red ball through the dust , burned and scorched his back intolerably through his black coat .
The dust always hung motionless above the buzz of talk that came from the resting troops .
There was no wind .
As he crossed the dam Prince Andrew smelled the ooze and freshness of the pond .
He longed to get into that water , however dirty it might be , and he glanced round at the pool from whence came sounds of shrieks and laughter .
All this naked white human flesh , laughing and shrieking , floundered about in that dirty pool like carp stuffed into a watering can , and the suggestion of merriment in that floundering mass rendered it specially pathetic .
There were sounds of men slapping one another , yelling , and puffing .
Everywhere on the bank , on the dam , and in the pond , there was healthy , white , muscular flesh .
The officer , Tim'okhin , with his red little nose , standing on the dam wiping himself with a towel , felt confused at seeing the prince , but made up his mind to address him nevertheless .
" It 's very nice , your excellency !
Would n't you like to ? " said he .
" It 's dirty , " replied Prince Andrew , making a grimace .
" We 'll clear it out for you in a minute , " said Tim'okhin , and , still undressed , ran off to clear the men out of the pond .
" The prince wants to bathe . "
" What prince ?
Ours ? "
said many voices , and the men were in such haste to clear out that the prince could hardly stop them .
He decided that he would rather wash himself with water in the barn .
On the seventh of August Prince Bagrati'on wrote as follows from his quarters at Mikh'aylovna on the Smol'ensk road :
Dear Count Al'exis Andr'eevich-(He was writing to Arakch'eev but knew that his letter would be read by the Emperor , and therefore weighed every word in it to the best of his ability . )
I expect the Minister ( Barclay de Tolly ) has already reported the abandonment of Smol'ensk to the enemy .
It is pitiable and sad , and the whole army is in despair that this most important place has been wantonly abandoned .
I , for my part , begged him personally most urgently and finally wrote him , but nothing would induce him to consent .
I swear to you on my honor that Napoleon was in such a fix as never before and might have lost half his army but could not have taken Smol'ensk .
Our troops fought , and are fighting , as never before .
With fifteen thousand men I held the enemy at bay for thirty - five hours and beat him ; but he would not hold out even for fourteen hours .
It is disgraceful , a stain on our army , and as for him , he ought , it seems to me , not to live .
If he reports that our losses were great , it is not true ; perhaps about four thousand , not more , and not even that ; but even were they ten thousand , that 's war !
But the enemy has lost masses ....
What would it have cost him to hold out for another two days ?
They would have had to retire of their own accord , for they had no water for men or horses .
He gave me his word he would not retreat , but suddenly sent instructions that he was retiring that night .
We can not fight in this way , or we may soon bring the enemy to Moscow ....
There is a rumor that you are thinking of peace .
God forbid that you should make peace after all our sacrifices and such insane retreats !
You would set all Russia against you and everyone of us would feel ashamed to wear the uniform .
If it has come to this - we must fight as long as Russia can and as long as there are men able to stand ....
One man ought to be in command , and not two .
Your Minister may perhaps be good as a Minister , but as a general he is not merely bad but execrable , yet to him is entrusted the fate of our whole country ....
I am really frantic with vexation ; forgive my writing boldly .
It is clear that the man who advocates the conclusion of a peace , and that the Minister should command the army , does not love our sovereign and desires the ruin of us all .
So I write you frankly : call out the militia .
For the Minister is leading these visitors after him to Moscow in a most masterly way .
The whole army feels great suspicion of the Imperial aide - de - camp Wolzogen .
He is said to be more Napoleon 's man than ours , and he is always advising the Minister .
I am not merely civil to him but obey him like a corporal , though I am his senior .
This is painful , but , loving my benefactor and sovereign , I submit .
Only I am sorry for the Emperor that he entrusts our fine army to such as he .
Consider that on our retreat we have lost by fatigue and left in the hospital more than fifteen thousand men , and had we attacked this would not have happened .
What are we scared at and of whom are we afraid ?
I am not to blame that the Minister is vacillating , a coward , dense , dilatory , and has all bad qualities .
The whole army bewails it and calls down curses upon him ....
CHAPTER VI
Among the innumerable categories applicable to the phenomena of human life one may discriminate between those in which substance prevails and those in which form prevails .
To the latter - as distinguished from village , country , provincial , or even Moscow life - we may allot Petersburg life , and especially the life of its salons .
That life of the salons is unchanging .
Of late , since the Emperor 's return from the army , there had been some excitement in these conflicting salon circles and some demonstrations of hostility to one another , but each camp retained its own tendency .
The progress of the war was eagerly followed , and only the reports most flattering to our army were circulated .
In the French circle of H'el`ene and Rumy'antsev the reports of the cruelty of the enemy and of the war were contradicted and all Napoleon 's attempts at conciliation were discussed .
In that circle they discountenanced those who advised hurried preparations for a removal to Kaz'an of the court and the girls ' educational establishments under the patronage of the Dowager Empress .
In that circle the Moscow enthusiasm - news of which had reached Petersburg simultaneously with the Emperor 's return - was ridiculed sarcastically and very cleverly , though with much caution .
Anna P'avlovna 's circle on the contrary was enraptured by this enthusiasm and spoke of it as Plutarch speaks of the deeds of the ancients .
Prince Vas'ili , who still occupied his former important posts , formed a connecting link between these two circles .
Soon after the Emperor 's return Prince Vas'ili in a conversation about the war at Anna P'avlovna 's severely condemned Barclay de Tolly , but was undecided as to who ought to be appointed commander in chief .
Anna P'avlovna remarked with a melancholy smile that Kut'uzov had done nothing but cause the Emperor annoyance .
" I have talked and talked at the Assembly of the Nobility , " Prince Vas'ili interrupted , " but they did not listen to me .
I told them his election as chief of the militia would not please the Emperor .
They did not listen to me .
" It 's all this mania for opposition , " he went on . "
And who for ?
But he retrieved his mistake at once . "
Now , is it suitable that Count Kut'uzov , the oldest general in Russia , should preside at that tribunal ?
He will get nothing for his pains !
How could they make a man commander in chief who can not mount a horse , who drops asleep at a council , and has the very worst morals !
A good reputation he made for himself at Bucharest !
I do n't speak of his capacity as a general , but at a time like this how they appoint a decrepit , blind old man , positively blind ?
A fine idea to have a blind general !
He ca n't see anything .
To play blindman 's buff ?
He ca n't see at all ! "
No one replied to his remarks .
This was quite correct on the twenty - fourth of July .
But on the twenty - ninth of July Kut'uzov received the title of Prince .
This might indicate a wish to get rid of him , and therefore Prince Vas'ili 's opinion continued to be correct though he was not now in any hurry to express it .
But on the eighth of August a committee , consisting of Field Marshal Saltyk'ov , Arakch'eev , Vyazm'itinov , Lopukh'in , and Kochub'ey met to consider the progress of the war .
That same day Kut'uzov was appointed commander in chief with full powers over the armies and over the whole region occupied by them .
On the ninth of August Prince Vas'ili at Anna P'avlovna 's again met the " man of great merit . "
The latter was very attentive to Anna P'avlovna because he wanted to be appointed director of one of the educational establishments for young ladies .
Prince Vas'ili entered the room with the air of a happy conqueror who has attained the object of his desires .
" Well , have you heard the great news ?
Prince Kut'uzov is field marshal !
All dissensions are at an end !
I am so glad , so delighted !
At last we have a man ! "
said he , glancing sternly and significantly round at everyone in the drawing room .
The " man of great merit , " despite his desire to obtain the post of director , could not refrain from reminding Prince Vas'ili of his former opinion .
Though this was impolite to Prince Vas'ili in Anna P'avlovna 's drawing room , and also to Anna P'avlovna herself who had received the news with delight , he could not resist the temptation .
" But , Prince , they say he is blind ! "
said he , reminding Prince Vas'ili of his own words .
" Eh ? Nonsense !
He sees well enough , " said Prince Vas'ili rapidly , in a deep voice and with a slight cough - the voice and cough with which he was wo nt to dispose of all difficulties .
" He sees well enough , " he added .
He is a second autocrat , " he concluded with a victorious smile .
" God grant it !
God grant it ! " said Anna P'avlovna .
The " man of great merit , " who was still a novice in court circles , wishing to flatter Anna P'avlovna by defending her former position on this question , observed :
" It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to give Kut'uzov those powers .
They say he blushed like a girl to whom Joconde is read , when he said to Kut'uzov : ' Your Emperor and the Fatherland award you this honor . ' "
" Perhaps the heart took no part in that speech , " said Anna P'avlovna .
" Oh , no , no ! " warmly rejoined Prince Vas'ili , who would not now yield Kut'uzov to anyone ; in his opinion Kut'uzov was not only admirable himself , but was adored by everybody . "
No , that 's impossible , " said he , " for our sovereign appreciated him so highly before . "
" God grant only that Prince Kut'uzov assumes real power and does not allow anyone to put a spoke in his wheel , " observed Anna P'avlovna .
Understanding at once to whom she alluded , Prince Vas'ili said in a whisper :
" I know for a fact that Kut'uzov made it an absolute condition that the Tsar'evich should not be with the army .
Do you know what he said to the Emperor ? "
And Prince Vas'ili repeated the words supposed to have been spoken by Kut'uzov to the Emperor .
" I can neither punish him if he does wrong nor reward him if he does right . "
" Oh , a very wise man is Prince Kut'uzov !
I have known him a long time ! "
As soon as he said this both Prince Vas'ili and Anna P'avlovna turned away from him and glanced sadly at one another with a sigh at his na"ivet'e .
CHAPTER VII
While this was taking place in Petersburg the French had already passed Smol'ensk and were drawing nearer and nearer to Moscow .
Napoleon 's historian Thiers , like other of his historians , trying to justify his hero says that he was drawn to the walls of Moscow against his will .
Here besides the law of retrospection , which regards all the past as a preparation for events that subsequently occur , the law of reciprocity comes in , confusing the whole matter .
He only notices the mistake to which he pays attention , because his opponent took advantage of it .
From Vy'azma Napoleon ordered a direct advance on Moscow .
Moscou , la capitale asiatique de ce grand empire , la ville sacr'ee des peuples d'Alexandre , Moscou avec ses innombrables ' eglises en forme de pagodes chinoises ,
* this Moscow gave Napoleon 's imagination no rest .
On the march from Vy'azma to Ts'arevo - Zaym'ishche he rode his light bay bobtailed ambler accompanied by his Guards , his bodyguard , his pages , and aides - de - camp .
Berthier , his chief of staff , dropped behind to question a Russian prisoner captured by the cavalry .
Followed by Lelorgne d'Ideville , an interpreter , he overtook Napoleon at a gallop and reined in his horse with an amused expression .
* " Moscow , the Asiatic capital of this great empire , the sacred city of Alexander 's people , Moscow with its innumerable churches shaped like Chinese pagodas . "
" Well ? " asked Napoleon .
" One of Pl'atov 's Cossacks says that Pl'atov 's corps is joining up with the main army and that Kut'uzov has been appointed commander in chief .
He is a very shrewd and garrulous fellow . "
Napoleon smiled and told them to give the Cossack a horse and bring the man to him .
He wished to talk to him himself .
Napoleon told him to ride by his side and began questioning him .
" You are a Cossack ? "
" Yes , a Cossack , your Honor . "
Finding himself in the company of Napoleon , whose identity he had easily and surely recognized , Lavr'ushka was not in the least abashed but merely did his utmost to gain his new master 's favor .
So he rattled on , telling all the gossip he had heard among the orderlies .
Much of it true .
But when Napoleon asked him whether the Russians thought they would beat Bonaparte or not , Lavr'ushka screwed up his eyes and considered .
In this question he saw subtle cunning , as men of his type see cunning in everything , so he frowned and did not answer immediately .
" It 's like this , " he said thoughtfully , " if there 's a battle soon , yours will win .
That 's right .
But if three days pass , then after that , well , then that same battle will not soon be over . "
Lelorgne d'Ideville smilingly interpreted this speech to Napoleon thus : " If a battle takes place within the next three days the French will win , but if later , God knows what will happen . "
Napoleon did not smile , though he was evidently in high good humor , and he ordered these words to be repeated .
Lavr'ushka noticed this and to entertain him further , pretending not to know who Napoleon was , added :
" We know that you have Bonaparte and that he has beaten everybody in the world , but we are a different matter ...
"-without knowing why or how this bit of boastful patriotism slipped out at the end .
The interpreter translated these words without the last phrase , and Bonaparte smiled . "
The young Cossack made his mighty interlocutor smile , " says Thiers .
* " Child of the Don . "
The fact was accordingly conveyed to Lavr'ushka .
All his loquacity was suddenly arrested and replaced by a na"ive and silent feeling of admiration .
Napoleon , after making the Cossack a present , had him set free like a bird restored to its native fields . "
What had really taken place
he did not wish to relate because it seemed to him not worth telling .
He found the Cossacks , inquired for the regiment operating with Pl'atov 's detachment and by evening found his master , Nicholas Rost'ov , quartered at Yank'ovo .
Rost'ov was just mounting to go for a ride round the neighboring villages with Ily'in ; he let Lavr'ushka have another horse and took him along with him .
CHAPTER VIII
Princess Mary was not in Moscow and out of danger as Prince Andrew supposed .
After the return of Alp'atych from Smol'ensk the old prince suddenly seemed to awake as from a dream .
But while himself remaining , he gave instructions for the departure of the princess and Dessalles with the little prince to Boguch'arovo and thence to Moscow .
Princess Mary , alarmed by her father 's feverish and sleepless activity after his previous apathy , could not bring herself to leave him alone and for the first time in her life ventured to disobey him .
She refused to go away and her father 's fury broke over her in a terrible storm .
He repeated every injustice he had ever inflicted on her .
He declared that he did not wish to remember her existence and warned her not to dare to let him see her .
The fact that he did not , as she had feared , order her to be carried away by force but only told her not to let him see her cheered Princess Mary .
She knew it was a proof that in the depth of his soul he was glad she was remaining at home and had not gone away .
The morning after little Nicholas had left , the old prince donned his full uniform and prepared to visit the commander in chief .
His cal`eche was already at the door .
Princess Mary saw him walk out of the house in his uniform wearing all his orders and go down the garden to review his armed peasants and domestic serfs .
She sat by the window listening to his voice which reached her from the garden .
Suddenly several men came running up the avenue with frightened faces .
Princess Mary ran out to the porch , down the flower - bordered path , and into the avenue .
A large crowd of militiamen and domestics were moving toward her , and in their midst several men were supporting by the armpits and dragging along a little old man in a uniform and decorations .
All she could see was that his former stern and determined expression had altered to one of timidity and submission .
On seeing his daughter he moved his helpless lips and made a hoarse sound .
It was impossible to make out what he wanted .
He was lifted up , carried to his study , and laid on the very couch he had so feared of late .
The doctor , who was fetched that same night , bled him and said that the prince had had a seizure paralyzing his right side .
It was becoming more and more dangerous to remain at Bald Hills , and next day they moved the prince to Boguch'arovo , the doctor accompanying him .
By the time they reached Boguch'arovo , Dessalles and the little prince had already left for Moscow .
For three weeks the old prince lay stricken by paralysis in the new house Prince Andrew had built at Boguch'arovo , ever in the same state , getting neither better nor worse .
He was unconscious and lay like a distorted corpse .
He muttered unceasingly , his eyebrows and lips twitching , and it was impossible to tell whether he understood what was going on around him or not .
One thing was certain - that he was suffering and wished to say something .
But what it was , no one could tell : it might be some caprice of a sick and half - crazy man , or it might relate to public affairs , or possibly to family concerns .
He was evidently suffering both physically and mentally .
There was no hope of recovery .
It was impossible for him to travel , it would not do to let him die on the road . "
Would it not be better if the end did come , the very end ? "
Princess Mary sometimes thought .
Strange as it was to her to acknowledge this feeling in herself , yet there it was .
Thrust them aside as she would , questions continually recurred to her as to how she would order her life now , after that .
These were temptations of the devil and Princess Mary knew it .
She knew that the sole weapon against him was prayer , and she tried to pray .
She assumed an attitude of prayer , looked at the icons , repeated the words of a prayer , but she could not pray .
She could not pray , could not weep , and worldly cares took possession of her .
It was becoming dangerous to remain in Boguch'arovo .
News of the approach of the French came from all sides , and in one village , ten miles from Boguch'arovo , a homestead had been looted by French marauders .
The princess decided to leave on the fifteenth .
The cares of preparation and giving orders , for which everyone came to her , occupied her all day .
She spent the night of the fourteenth as usual , without undressing , in the room next to the one where the prince lay .
Several times , waking up , she heard his groans and muttering , the creak of his bed , and the steps of T'ikhon and the doctor when they turned him over .
Several times she listened at the door , and it seemed to her that his mutterings were louder than usual and that they turned him over oftener .
She could not sleep and several times went to the door and listened , wishing to enter but not deciding to do so .
Though he did not speak , Princess Mary saw and knew how unpleasant every sign of anxiety on his account was to him .
She had noticed with what dissatisfaction he turned from the look she sometimes involuntarily fixed on him .
She knew that her going in during the night at an unusual hour would irritate him .
But never had she felt so grieved for him or so much afraid of losing him .
She recalled all her life with him and in every word and act of his found an expression of his love of her .
Occasionally amid these memories temptations of the devil would surge into her imagination : thoughts of how things would be after his death , and how her new , liberated life would be ordered .
But she drove these thoughts away with disgust .
Toward morning he became quiet and she fell asleep .
She woke late .
That sincerity which often comes with waking showed her clearly what chiefly concerned her about her father 's illness .
On waking she listened to what was going on behind the door and , hearing him groan , said to herself with a sigh that things were still the same .
" But what could have happened ?
What did I want ?
I want his death ! "
she cried with a feeling of loathing for herself .
She washed , dressed , said her prayers , and went out to the porch .
In front of it stood carriages without horses and things were being packed into the vehicles .
It was a warm , gray morning .
Princess Mary stopped at the porch , still horrified by her spiritual baseness and trying to arrange her thoughts before going to her father .
The doctor came downstairs and went out to her .
" He is a little better today , " said he .
" I was looking for you .
One can make out something of what he is saying .
His head is clearer .
Come in , he is asking for you .... "
Princess Mary 's heart beat so violently at this news that she grew pale and leaned against the wall to keep from falling .
To see him , talk to him , feel his eyes on her now that her whole soul was overflowing with those dreadful , wicked temptations , was a torment of joy and terror .
" Come , " said the doctor .
Princess Mary entered her father 's room and went up to his bed .
He seemed altogether so thin , small , and pathetic .
His face seemed to have shriveled or melted ; his features had grown smaller .
Princess Mary went up and kissed his hand .
His left hand pressed hers
so that she understood that he had long been waiting for her to come .
He twitched her hand , and his brows and lips quivered angrily .
She looked at him in dismay trying to guess what he wanted of her .
When she changed her position so that his left eye could see her face he calmed down , not taking his eyes off her for some seconds .
Then his lips and tongue moved , sounds came , and he began to speak , gazing timidly and imploringly at her , evidently afraid that she might not understand .
Straining all her faculties Princess Mary looked at him .
The comic efforts with which he moved his tongue made her drop her eyes and with difficulty repress the sobs that rose to her throat .
He said something , repeating the same words several times .
She could not understand them , but tried to guess what he was saying and inquiringly repeated the words he uttered .
" Mmm ... ar ... ate ... ate ... " he repeated several times .
It was quite impossible to understand these sounds .
The doctor thought he had guessed them , and inquiringly repeated : " Mary , are you afraid ? "
The prince shook his head , again repeated the same sounds .
" My mind , my mind aches ? " questioned Princess Mary .
He made a mumbling sound in confirmation of this , took her hand , and began pressing it to different parts of his breast as if trying to find the right place for it .
" Always thoughts ... about you ... thoughts ... " he then uttered much more clearly than he had done before , now that he was sure of being understood .
Princess Mary pressed her head against his hand , trying to hide her sobs and tears .
He moved his hand over her hair .
" I have been calling you all night ... " he brought out .
" If only I had known ... " she said through her tears .
" I was afraid to come in . "
He pressed her hand .
" Were n't you asleep ? "
" No , I did not sleep , " said Princess Mary , shaking her head .
Unconsciously imitating her father , she now tried to express herself as he did , as much as possible by signs , and her tongue too seemed to move with difficulty .
" Dear one ...
Dearest ... "
Princess Mary could not quite make out what he had said , but from his look it was clear that he had uttered a tender caressing word such as he had never used to her before . "
Why did n't you come in ? "
" And I was wishing for his death ! " thought Princess Mary .
He was silent awhile .
" Thank you ... daughter dear ! ...
for all , for all ... forgive ! ...
thank you ! ...
forgive ! ...
thank you ! ... " and tears began to flow from his eyes . "
Call Andrew !
" he said suddenly , and a childish , timid expression of doubt showed itself on his face as he spoke .
He himself seemed aware that his demand was meaningless .
So at least it seemed to Princess Mary .
" I have a letter from him , " she replied .
He glanced at her with timid surprise .
" Where is he ? "
" He 's with the army , Father , at Smol'ensk . "
He closed his eyes and remained silent a long time .
Then as if in answer to his doubts and to confirm the fact that now he understood and remembered everything , he nodded his head and reopened his eyes .
" Yes , " he said , softly and distinctly . "
Russia has perished .
They 've destroyed her . "
And he began to sob , and again tears flowed from his eyes .
Princess Mary could no longer restrain herself and wept while she gazed at his face .
Again he closed his eyes .
His sobs ceased , he pointed to his eyes , and T'ikhon , understanding him , wiped away the tears .
Then he again opened his eyes and said something none of them could understand for a long time , till at last T'ikhon understood and repeated it .
Princess Mary had sought the meaning of his words in the mood in which he had just been speaking .
She thought he was speaking of Russia , or Prince Andrew , of herself , of his grandson , or of his own death , and so she could not guess his words .
" Put on your white dress .
I like it , " was what he said .
Having understood this Princess Mary sobbed still louder , and the doctor taking her arm led her out to the veranda , soothing her and trying to persuade her to prepare for her journey .
Princess Mary stayed on the veranda .
The day had cleared , it was hot and sunny .
She could understand nothing , think of nothing and feel nothing , except passionate love for her father , love such as she thought she had never felt till that moment .
She ran out sobbing into the garden and as far as the pond , along the avenues of young lime trees Prince Andrew had planted .
" Yes ... I ...
I ...
I wished for his death !
Yes , I wanted it to end quicker ....
I wished to be at peace ....
And what will become of me ?
What use will peace be when he is no longer here ? "
Princess Mary murmured , pacing the garden with hurried steps and pressing her hands to her bosom which heaved with convulsive sobs .
This was the Marshal of the Nobility of the district , who had come personally to point out to the princess the necessity for her prompt departure .
Princess Mary listened without understanding him ; she led him to the house , offered him lunch , and sat down with him .
Then , excusing herself , she went to the door of the old prince 's room .
The doctor came out with an agitated face and said she could not enter .
" Go away , Princess !
Go away ... go away ! "
She returned to the garden and sat down on the grass at the foot of the slope by the pond , where no one could see her .
She did not know how long she had been there when she was aroused by the sound of a woman 's footsteps running along the path .
She rose and saw Duny'asha her maid , who was evidently looking for her , and who stopped suddenly as if in alarm on seeing her mistress .
" Please come , Princess ...
The Prince , " said Duny'asha in a breaking voice .
" Immediately , I 'm coming , I 'm coming ! "
replied the princess hurriedly , not giving Duny'asha time to finish what she was saying , and trying to avoid seeing the girl she ran toward the house .
" Princess , it 's God 's will !
You must be prepared for everything , " said the Marshal , meeting her at the house door .
" Let me alone ; it 's not true ! "
she cried angrily to him .
The doctor tried to stop her .
She pushed him aside and ran to her father 's door .
" Why are these people with frightened faces stopping me ?
I do n't want any of them !
And what are they doing here ?
" she thought .
She opened the door and the bright daylight in that previously darkened room startled her .
In the room were her nurse and other women .
They all drew back from the bed , making way for her .
He was still lying on the bed as before , but the stern expression of his quiet face made Princess Mary stop short on the threshold .
" No , he 's not dead - it 's impossible !
" she told herself and approached him , and repressing the terror that seized her , she pressed her lips to his cheek .
But she stepped back immediately .
All the force of the tenderness she had been feeling for him vanished instantly and was replaced by a feeling of horror at what lay there before her . "
No , he is no more !
He is not , but here where he was is something unfamiliar and hostile , some dreadful , terrifying , and repellent mystery ! "
And hiding her face in her hands , Princess Mary sank into the arms of the doctor , who held her up .
Then they dressed him in uniform with his decorations and placed his shriveled little body on a table .
Heaven only knows who arranged all this and when , but it all got done as if of its own accord .
CHAPTER IX
Until Prince Andrew settled in Boguch'arovo its owners had always been absentees , and its peasants were of quite a different character from those of Bald Hills .
They differed from them in speech , dress , and disposition .
They were called steppe peasants .
The old prince used to approve of them for their endurance at work when they came to Bald Hills to help with the harvest or to dig ponds , and ditches , but he disliked them for their boorishness .
Rumors of the war with Bonaparte and his invasion were connected in their minds with the same sort of vague notions of Antichrist , the end of the world , and " pure freedom . "
In the vicinity of Boguch'arovo were large villages belonging to the crown or to owners whose serfs paid quitrent and could work where they pleased .
One instance , which had occurred some twenty years before , was a movement among the peasants to emigrate to some unknown " warm rivers . "
Hundreds of peasants , among them the Boguch'arovo folk , suddenly began selling their cattle and moving in whole families toward the southeast .
As birds migrate to somewhere beyond the sea , so these men with their wives and children streamed to the southeast , to parts where none of them had ever been .
They set off in caravans , bought their freedom one by one or ran away , and drove or walked toward the " warm rivers .
But such undercurrents still existed among the people and gathered new forces ready to manifest themselves just as strangely , unexpectedly , and at the same time simply , naturally , and forcibly .
Now in 1812 , to anyone living in close touch with these people it was apparent that these undercurrents were acting strongly and nearing an eruption .
As proof of this the peasant had brought from Vislo'ukhovo a hundred rubles in notes ( he did not know that they were false ) paid to him in advance for hay .
Yet there was no time to waste .
On the fifteenth , the day of the old prince 's death , the Marshal had insisted on Princess Mary 's leaving at once , as it was becoming dangerous .
He had told her that after the sixteenth he could not be responsible for what might happen .
On the evening of the day the old prince died the Marshal went away , promising to return next day for the funeral .
But this he was unable to do , for he received tidings that the French had unexpectedly advanced , and had barely time to remove his own family and valuables from his estate .
For some thirty years Boguch'arovo had been managed by the village Elder , Dron ,
whom the old prince called by the diminutive " Dr'onushka . "
The peasants feared him more than they did their master .
The masters , both the old prince and the young , and the steward respected him and jestingly called him " the Minister . "
Though the peasants paid quitrent , Alp'atych thought no difficulty would be made about complying with this order , for there were two hundred and thirty households at work in Boguch'arovo and the peasants were well to do .
But on hearing the order Dron lowered his eyes and remained silent .
Alp'atych named certain peasants he knew , from whom he told him to take the carts .
Dron replied that the horses of these peasants were away carting .
Alp'atych named others , but they too , according to Dron , had no horses available : some horses were carting for the government , others were too weak , and others had died for want of fodder .
It seemed that no horses could be had even for the carriages , much less for the carting .
Alp'atych looked intently at Dron and frowned .
Just as Dron was a model village Elder , so Alp'atych had not managed the prince 's estates for twenty years in vain .
He was a model steward , possessing in the highest degree the faculty of divining the needs and instincts of those he dealt with .
Having glanced at Dron he at once understood that his answers did not express his personal views but the general mood of the Boguch'arovo commune , by which the Elder had already been carried away .
But he also knew that Dron , who had acquired property and was hated by the commune , must be hesitating between the two camps : the masters ' and the serfs ' .
He noticed this hesitation in Dron 's look and therefore frowned and moved closer up to him .
" Now just listen , Dr'onushka , " said he .
" Do n't talk nonsense to me .
His excellency Prince Andrew himself gave me orders to move all the people away and not leave them with the enemy , and there is an order from the Tsar about it too .
Anyone who stays is a traitor to the Tsar .
Do you hear ? "
" I hear , " Dron answered without lifting his eyes .
Alp'atych was not satisfied with this reply .
" Eh , Dron , it will turn out badly ! "
he said , shaking his head .
" The power is in your hands , " Dron rejoined sadly .
" Eh , Dron , drop it ! "
Alp'atych repeated , withdrawing his hand from his bosom and solemnly pointing to the floor at Dron 's feet .
" I can see through you and three yards into the ground under you , " he continued , gazing at the floor in front of Dron .
Dron was disconcerted , glanced furtively at Alp'atych and again lowered his eyes .
" You drop this nonsense and tell the people to get ready to leave their homes and go to Moscow and to get carts ready for tomorrow morning for the princess ' things .
And do n't go to any meeting yourself , do you hear ? "
Dron suddenly fell on his knees .
" Y'akov Alp'atych , discharge me !
Take the keys from me and discharge me , for Christ 's sake ! "
" Stop that ! "
cried Alp'atych sternly .
Dron got up and was about to say something , but Alp'atych interrupted him .
" What is it you have got into your heads , eh ? ...
What are you thinking of , eh ? "
" What am I to do with the people ? " said Dron .
" They 're quite beside themselves ; I have already told them ... "
" ' Told them , ' I dare say ! " said Alp'atych .
" Are they drinking ? "
he asked abruptly .
" Quite beside themselves , Y'akov Alp'atych ; they 've fetched another barrel . "
" Well , then , listen !
I 'll go to the police officer , and you tell them so , and that they must stop this and the carts must be got ready . "
" I understand . "
Alp'atych did not insist further .
He had managed people for a long time and knew that the chief way to make them obey is to show no suspicion that they can possibly disobey .
Having wrung a submissive " I understand " from Dron , Alp'atych contented himself with that , though he not only doubted but felt almost certain that without the help of troops the carts would not be forthcoming .
And so it was , for when evening came no carts had been provided .
In the village , outside the drink shop , another meeting was being held , which decided that the horses should be driven out into the woods and the carts should not be provided .
Without saying anything of this to the princess , Alp'atych had his own belongings taken out of the carts which had arrived from Bald Hills and had those horses got ready for the princess ' carriages .
Meanwhile he went himself to the police authorities .
CHAPTER X
After her father 's funeral Princess Mary shut herself up in her room and did not admit anyone .
A maid came to the door to say that Alp'atych was asking for orders about their departure .
( This was before his talk with Dron . )
Princess Mary raised herself on the sofa on which she had been lying and replied through the closed door that she did not mean to go away and begged to be left in peace .
The windows of the room in which she was lying looked westward .
She wished to pray but did not dare to , dared not in her present state of mind address herself to God .
She lay for a long time in that position .
The sun had reached the other side of the house , and its slanting rays shone into the open window , lighting up the room and part of the morocco cushion at which Princess Mary was looking .
The flow of her thoughts suddenly stopped .
Unconsciously she sat up , smoothed her hair , got up , and went to the window , involuntarily inhaling the freshness of the clear but windy evening .
" Yes , you can well enjoy the evening now !
He is gone and no one will hinder you , " she said to herself , and sinking into a chair she let her head fall on the window sill .
Someone spoke her name in a soft and tender voice from the garden and kissed her head .
She looked up .
It was Mademoiselle Bourienne in a black dress and weepers .
She softly approached Princess Mary , sighed , kissed her , and immediately began to cry .
The princess looked up at her .
All their former disharmony and her own jealousy recurred to her mind .
But she remembered too how he had changed of late toward Mademoiselle Bourienne and could not bear to see her , thereby showing how unjust were the reproaches Princess Mary had mentally addressed to her . "
Besides , is it for me , for me who desired his death , to condemn anyone ?
" she thought .
Princess Mary vividly pictured to herself the position of Mademoiselle Bourienne , whom she had of late kept at a distance , but who yet was dependent on her and living in her house .
She felt sorry for her and held out her hand with a glance of gentle inquiry .
Mademoiselle Bourienne at once began crying again and kissed that hand , speaking of the princess ' sorrow and making herself a partner in it .
The princess heard her , not heeding her words but occasionally looking up at her and listening to the sound of her voice .
" Your position is doubly terrible , dear princess , " said Mademoiselle Bourienne after a pause .
" I understand that you could not , and can not , think of yourself , but with my love for you
I must do so ....
Has Alp'atych been to you ?
Has he spoken to you of going away ?
" she asked .
Princess Mary did not answer .
She did not understand who was to go or where to . "
Is it possible to plan or think of anything now ?
Is it not all the same ?
" she thought , and did not reply .
" You know , ch`ere Marie , " said Mademoiselle Bourienne , " that we are in danger - are surrounded by the French .
It would be dangerous to move now .
If we go we are almost sure to be taken prisoners , and God knows ... "
Princess Mary looked at her companion without understanding what she was talking about .
" Oh , if anyone knew how little anything matters to me now , " she said .
" Of course I would on no account wish to go away from him ....
Alp'atych did say something about going ....
Speak to him ; I can do nothing , nothing , and do n't want to .... "
" I 've spoken to him .
He hopes we should be in time to get away tomorrow , but I think it would now be better to stay here , " said Mademoiselle Bourienne .
" Because , you will agree , ch`ere Marie , to fall into the hands of the soldiers or of riotous peasants would be terrible . "
Mademoiselle Bourienne took from her reticule a proclamation ( not printed on ordinary Russian paper ) of General Rameau 's , telling people not to leave their homes and that the French authorities would afford them proper protection .
She handed this to the princess .
" I think it would be best to appeal to that general , " she continued , " and I am sure that all due respect would be shown you . "
Princess Mary read the paper , and her face began to quiver with stifled sobs .
" From whom did you get this ? " she asked .
" They probably recognized that I am French , by my name , " replied Mademoiselle Bourienne blushing .
Princess Mary , with the paper in her hand , rose from the window and with a pale face went out of the room and into what had been Prince Andrew 's study .
" Duny'asha , send Alp'atych , or Dr'onushka , or somebody to me ! "
she said , " and tell Mademoiselle Bourienne not to come to me , " she added , hearing Mademoiselle Bourienne 's voice .
" We must go at once , at once ! "
she said , appalled at the thought of being left in the hands of the French .
" If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the French !
That I , the daughter of Prince Nicholas Bolk'onski , asked General Rameau for protection and accepted his favor ! "
This idea horrified her , made her shudder , blush , and feel such a rush of anger and pride as she had never experienced before .
All that was distressing , and especially all that was humiliating , in her position rose vividly to her mind .
" They , the French , would settle in this house : M. le G'en'eral Rameau would occupy Prince Andrew 's study and amuse himself by looking through and reading his letters and papers .
Mademoiselle Bourienne would do the honors of Boguch'arovo for him .
For herself she did not care where she remained or what happened to her , but she felt herself the representative of her dead father and of Prince Andrew .
Involuntarily she thought their thoughts and felt their feelings .
What they would have said and what they would have done she felt bound to say and do .
She went into Prince Andrew 's study , trying to enter completely into his ideas , and considered her position .
The demands of life , which had seemed to her annihilated by her father 's death , all at once rose before her with a new , previously unknown force and took possession of her .
Agitated and flushed she paced the room , sending now for Michael Iv'anovich and now for T'ikhon or Dron .
Duny'asha , the nurse , and the other maids could not say in how far Mademoiselle Bourienne 's statement was correct .
Alp'atych was not at home , he had gone to the police .
Neither could the architect Michael Iv'anovich , who on being sent for came in with sleepy eyes , tell Princess Mary anything .
At length Dron , the village Elder , entered the room and with a deep bow to Princess Mary came to a halt by the doorpost .
Princess Mary walked up and down the room and stopped in front of him .
" We are all in God 's hands , " said he , with a sigh .
They were silent for a while .
" Dr'onushka , Alp'atych has gone off somewhere and I have no one to turn to .
Is it true , as they tell me , that I ca n't even go away ? "
" Why should n't you go away , your excellency ?
You can go , " said Dron .
" I was told it would be dangerous because of the enemy .
Dear friend , I can do nothing .
I understand nothing .
I have nobody !
I want to go away tonight or early tomorrow morning . "
Dron paused .
He looked askance at Princess Mary and said : " There are no horses ; I told Y'akov Alp'atych so . "
" Why are there none ? "
asked the princess .
" It 's all God 's scourge , " said Dron .
" What horses we had have been taken for the army or have died - this is such a year !
It 's not a case of feeding horses - we may die of hunger ourselves !
As it is , some go three days without eating .
We 've nothing , we 've been ruined . "
Princess Mary listened attentively to what he told her .
" The peasants are ruined ?
They have no bread ?
" she asked .
" They 're dying of hunger , " said Dron .
" It 's not a case of carting . "
" But why did n't you tell me , Dr'onushka ?
Is n't it possible to help them ?
I 'll do all I can .... "
To Princess Mary it was strange that now , at a moment when such sorrow was filling her soul , there could be rich people and poor , and the rich could refrain from helping the poor .
She had heard vaguely that there was such a thing as " landlord 's corn " which was sometimes given to the peasants .
She also knew that neither her father nor her brother would refuse to help the peasants in need , she only feared to make some mistake in speaking about the distribution of the grain she wished to give .
She was glad such cares presented themselves , enabling her without scruple to forget her own grief .
She began asking Dron about the peasants ' needs and what there was in Boguch'arovo that belonged to the landlord .
" But we have grain belonging to my brother ? " she said .
" The landlord 's grain is all safe , " replied Dron proudly .
" Our prince did not order it to be sold . "
" Give it to the peasants , let them have all they need ; I give you leave in my brother 's name , " said she .
Dron made no answer but sighed deeply .
" Give them that corn if there is enough of it .
Distribute it all .
I give this order in my brother 's name ; and tell them that what is ours is theirs .
We do not grudge them anything .
Tell them so . "
Dron looked intently at the princess while she was speaking .
" Discharge me , little mother , for God 's sake !
Order the keys to be taken from me , " said he .
" I have served twenty - three years and have done no wrong .
Discharge me , for God 's sake ! "
Princess Mary did not understand what he wanted of her or why he was asking to be discharged .
She replied that she had never doubted his devotion and that she was ready to do anything for him and for the peasants .
CHAPTER XI
An hour later Duny'asha came to tell the princess that Dron had come , and all the peasants had assembled at the barn by the princess ' order and wished to have word with their mistress .
" But I never told them to come , " said Princess Mary .
" I only told Dron to let them have the grain . "
" Only , for God 's sake , Princess dear , have them sent away and do n't go out to them .
It 's all a trick , " said Duny'asha , " and when Y'akov Alp'atych returns let us get away ... and please do n't ... "
" What is a trick ? " asked Princess Mary in surprise .
" I know it is , only listen to me for God 's sake !
Ask nurse too .
They say they do n't agree to leave Boguch'arovo as you ordered . "
" You 're making some mistake .
I never ordered them to go away , " said Princess Mary .
"
Call Dr'onushka . "
Dron came and confirmed Duny'asha 's words ; the peasants had come by the princess ' order .
" But I never sent for them , " declared the princess .
" You must have given my message wrong .
I only said that you were to give them the grain . "
Dron only sighed in reply .
" If you order it they will go away , " said he .
" No , no .
I 'll go out to them , " said Princess Mary , and in spite of the nurse 's and Duny'asha 's protests she went out into the porch ;
Dron , Duny'asha , the nurse , and Michael Iv'anovich following her .
" They probably think I am offering them the grain to bribe them to remain here , while I myself go away leaving them to the mercy of the French , " thought Princess Mary .
" I will offer them monthly rations and housing at our Moscow estate .
I am sure Andrew would do even more in my place , " she thought as she went out in the twilight toward the crowd standing on the pasture by the barn .
The men crowded closer together , stirred , and rapidly took off their hats .
Princess Mary lowered her eyes and , tripping over her skirt , came close up to them .
But again the sense that she represented her father and her brother gave her courage , and she boldly began her speech .
" I am very glad you have come , " she said without raising her eyes , and feeling her heart beating quickly and violently . "
Dr'onushka tells me that the war has ruined you .
That is our common misfortune , and I shall grudge nothing to help you .
I am myself going away because it is dangerous here ...
the enemy is near ... because ... I am giving you everything , my friends , and I beg you to take everything , all our grain , so that you may not suffer want !
And if you have been told that I am giving you the grain to keep you here - that is not true .
On the contrary , I ask you to go with all your belongings to our estate near Moscow , and I promise you I will see to it that there you shall want for nothing .
You shall be given food and lodging . "
The princess stopped .
Sighs were the only sound heard in the crowd .
Again she paused .
No one broke the silence .
" Ours is a common misfortune and we will share it together .
All that is mine is yours , " she concluded , scanning the faces before her .
All eyes were gazing at her with one and the same expression .
She could not fathom whether it was curiosity , devotion , gratitude , or apprehension and distrust - but the expression on all the faces was identical .
" We are all very thankful for your bounty , but it wo n't do for us to take the landlord 's grain , " said a voice at the back of the crowd .
" But why not ? " asked the princess .
No one replied and Princess Mary , looking round at the crowd , found that every eye she met now was immediately dropped .
" But why do n't you want to take it ? "
she asked again .
No one answered .
The silence began to oppress the princess and she tried to catch someone 's eye .
" Why do n't you speak ? " she inquired of a very old man who stood just in front of her leaning on his stick . " If you think something more is wanted , tell me !
I will do anything , " said she , catching his eye .
But as if this angered him , he bent his head quite low and muttered :
" Why should we agree ?
We do n't want the grain . "
" Why should we give up everything ?
We do n't agree .
Do n't agree ....
We are sorry for you , but we 're not willing .
Go away yourself , alone ... " came from various sides of the crowd .
And again all the faces in that crowd bore an identical expression , though now it was certainly not an expression of curiosity or gratitude , but of angry resolve .
" But you ca n't have understood me , " said Princess Mary with a sad smile .
" Why do n't you want to go ?
I promise to house and feed you , while here the enemy would ruin you .... "
But her voice was drowned by the voices of the crowd .
" We 're not willing .
Let them ruin us !
We wo n't take your grain .
We do n't agree . "
Again Princess Mary tried to catch someone 's eye , but not a single eye in the crowd was turned to her ; evidently they were all trying to avoid her look .
She felt strange and awkward .
" Oh yes , an artful tale !
Follow her into slavery !
Pull down your houses and go into bondage !
I dare say ! '
I 'll give you grain , indeed ! '
she says , " voices in the crowd were heard saying .
With drooping head Princess Mary left the crowd and went back to the house .
Having repeated her order to Dron to have horses ready for her departure next morning , she went to her room and remained alone with her own thoughts .
CHAPTER XII
She felt that she could not understand them however much she might think about them .
She thought only of one thing , her sorrow , which , after the break caused by cares for the present , seemed already to belong to the past .
Now she could remember it and weep or pray .
After sunset the wind had dropped .
The night was calm and fresh .
Pictures of the near past - her father 's illness and last moments - rose one after another to her memory .
And these pictures presented themselves to her so clearly and in such detail that they seemed now present , now past , and now future .
" Even then he wanted to tell me what he told me the day he died , " she thought .
" He had always thought what he said then . "
And she recalled in all its detail the night at Bald Hills before he had the last stroke , when with a foreboding of disaster she had remained at home against his will .
She had not slept and had stolen downstairs on tiptoe , and going to the door of the conservatory where he slept that night had listened at the door .
In a suffering and weary voice he was saying something to T'ikhon , speaking of the Crimea and its warm nights and of the Empress .
Evidently he had wanted to talk . "
And why did n't he call me ?
Why did n't he let me be there instead of T'ikhon ? "
Princess Mary had thought and thought again now . "
Now he will never tell anyone what he had in his soul .
Never will that moment return for him or for me when he might have said all he longed to say , and not T'ikhon but I might have heard and understood him .
Why did n't I enter the room ?
" she thought . "
Perhaps he would then have said to me what he said the day he died .
While talking to T'ikhon he asked about me twice .
He wanted to see me , and I was standing close by , outside the door .
It was sad and painful for him to talk to T'ikhon who did not understand him .
He was greatly depressed .
From behind the door I heard how he lay down on his bed groaning and loudly exclaimed , ' My God ! '
Why did n't I go in then ?
What could he have done to me ?
What could I have lost ?
And perhaps he would then have been comforted and would have said that word to me . "
And Princess Mary uttered aloud the caressing word he had said to her on the day of his death . "
Dear - est !
" she repeated , and began sobbing , with tears that relieved her soul .
She now saw his face before her .
" Dear - est ! "
she repeated again .
" What was he thinking when he uttered that word ?
What is he thinking now ?
And the horror that had seized her when she touched him and convinced herself that that was not he , but something mysterious and horrible , seized her again .
She tried to think of something else and to pray , but could do neither .
With wide - open eyes she gazed at the moonlight and the shadows , expecting every moment to see his dead face , and she felt that the silence brooding over the house and within it held her fast .
" Duny'asha , " she whispered . "
Duny'asha !
" she screamed wildly , and tearing herself out of this silence she ran to the servants ' quarters to meet her old nurse and the maidservants who came running toward her .
CHAPTER XIII
Rost'ov and Ily'in were in the merriest of moods .
Rost'ov had no idea that the village he was entering was the property of that very Bolk'onski who had been engaged to his sister .
Rost'ov and Ily'in gave rein to their horses for a last race along the incline before reaching Boguch'arovo , and Rost'ov , outstripping Ily'in , was the first to gallop into the village street .
" You 're first ! "
cried Ily'in , flushed .
" Yes , always first both on the grassland and here , " answered Rost'ov , stroking his heated Don'ets horse .
" And I 'd have won on my Frenchy , your excellency , " said Lavr'ushka from behind , alluding to his shabby cart horse , " only I did n't wish to mortify you . "
They rode at a footpace to the barn , where a large crowd of peasants was standing .
Some of the men bared their heads , others stared at the new arrivals without doffing their caps .
Two tall old peasants with wrinkled faces and scanty beards emerged from the tavern , smiling , staggering , and singing some incoherent song , and approached the officers .
" Fine fellows ! " said Rost'ov laughing .
" Is there any hay here ? "
" And how like one another , " said Ily'in .
" A mo - o - st me - r - r - y co - o - m - pa ... ! " sang one of the peasants with a blissful smile .
One of the men came out of the crowd and went up to Rost'ov .
" Who do you belong to ? " he asked .
" The French , " replied Ily'in jestingly , " and here is Napoleon himself "- and he pointed to Lavr'ushka .
" Then you are Russians ? "
the peasant asked again .
" And is there a large force of you here ? " said another , a short man , coming up .
" Very large , " answered Rost'ov .
" But why have you collected here ?
" he added .
" Is it a holiday ? "
" The old men have met to talk over the business of the commune , " replied the peasant , moving away .
At that moment , on the road leading from the big house , two women and a man in a white hat were seen coming toward the officers .
" The one in pink is mine , so keep off ! "
said Ily'in on seeing Duny'asha running resolutely toward him .
" She 'll be ours ! " said Lavr'ushka to Ily'in , winking .
" What do you want , my pretty ? " said Ily'in with a smile .
" The princess ordered me to ask your regiment and your name . "
" This is Count Rost'ov , squadron commander , and I am your humble servant . "
" Co - o - om - pa - ny ! " roared the tipsy peasant with a beatific smile as he looked at Ily'in talking to the girl .
Following Duny'asha , Alp'atych advanced to Rost'ov , having bared his head while still at a distance .
" May I make bold to trouble your honor ? " said he respectfully , but with a shade of contempt for the youthfulness of this officer and with a hand thrust into his bosom .
Wo n't you , please , ride on a little farther , " said Alp'atych with a melancholy smile , " as it is not convenient in the presence of ... ? "
He pointed to the two peasants who kept as close to him as horseflies to a horse .
" Ah ! ... Alp'atych ...
Ah , Y'akov Alp'atych ...
Grand !
Forgive us for Christ 's sake , eh ? " said the peasants , smiling joyfully at him .
Rost'ov looked at the tipsy peasants and smiled .
" Or perhaps they amuse your honor ? "
remarked Alp'atych with a staid air , as he pointed at the old men with his free hand .
" No , there 's not much to be amused at here , " said Rost'ov , and rode on a little way .
" What 's the matter ? "
he asked .
" Impossible ! " exclaimed Rost'ov .
" I have the honor to report to you the actual truth , " said Alp'atych .
Rost'ov dismounted , gave his horse to the orderly , and followed Alp'atych to the house , questioning him as to the state of affairs .
" Father ! Benefactor !
God has sent you ! "
exclaimed deeply moved voices as Rost'ov passed through the anteroom .
Princess Mary was sitting helpless and bewildered in the large sitting room , when Rost'ov was shown in .
She could not grasp who he was and why he had come , or what was happening to her .
This meeting immediately struck Rost'ov as a romantic event . "
A helpless girl overwhelmed with grief , left to the mercy of coarse , rioting peasants !
And what a strange fate sent me here !
What gentleness and nobility there are in her features and expression ! "
thought he as he looked at her and listened to her timid story .
When she began to tell him that all this had happened the day after her father 's funeral , her voice trembled .
She turned away , and then , as if fearing he might take her words as meant to move him to pity , looked at him with an apprehensive glance of inquiry .
There were tears in Rost'ov 's eyes .
Princess Mary noticed this and glanced gratefully at him with that radiant look which caused the plainness of her face to be forgotten .
" I can not express , Princess , how glad I am that I happened to ride here and am able to show my readiness to serve you , " said Rost'ov , rising .
" Go when you please , and I give you my word of honor that no one shall dare to cause you annoyance if only you will allow me to act as your escort . "
And bowing respectfully , as if to a lady of royal blood , he moved toward the door .
Rost'ov 's deferential tone seemed to indicate that though he would consider himself happy to be acquainted with her , he did not wish to take advantage of her misfortunes to intrude upon her .
Princess Mary understood this and appreciated his delicacy .
" I am very , very grateful to you , " she said in French , " but I hope it was all a misunderstanding and that no one is to blame for it .
" She suddenly began to cry .
" Excuse me ! "
she said .
Rost'ov , knitting his brows , left the room with another low bow .
CHAPTER XIV
" Well , is she pretty ?
Ah , friend - my pink one is delicious ; her name is Duny'asha .... "
But on glancing at Rost'ov 's face Ily'in stopped short .
He saw that his hero and commander was following quite a different train of thought .
Rost'ov glanced angrily at Ily'in and without replying strode off with rapid steps to the village .
" I 'll show them ; I 'll give it to them , the brigands ! " said he to himself .
Alp'atych at a gliding trot , only just managing not to run , kept up with him with difficulty .
" What decision have you been pleased to come to ? " said he .
Rost'ov stopped and , clenching his fists , suddenly and sternly turned on Alp'atych .
" Decision ?
What decision ?
Old dotard !
... " cried he . "
What have you been about ?
Eh ?
The peasants are rioting , and you ca n't manage them ?
You 're a traitor yourself !
I know you .
I 'll flay you all alive ! ... "
And as if afraid of wasting his store of anger , he left Alp'atych and went rapidly forward .
Alp'atych , mastering his offended feelings , kept pace with Rost'ov at a gliding gait and continued to impart his views .
He said the peasants were obdurate and that at the present moment it would be imprudent to " overresist " them without an armed force , and would it not be better first to send for the military ?
" I 'll give them armed force ...
I 'll ' overresist ' them ! "
uttered Rost'ov meaninglessly , breathless with irrational animal fury and the need to vent it .
Without considering what he would do he moved unconciously with quick , resolute steps toward the crowd .
And the nearer he drew to it the more Alp'atych felt that this unreasonable action might produce good results .
The peasants in the crowd were similarly impressed when they saw Rost'ov 's rapid , firm steps and resolute , frowning face .
After the hussars had come to the village and Rost'ov had gone to see the princess , a certain confusion and dissension had arisen among the crowd .
Some of the peasants said that these new arrivals were Russians and might take it amiss that the mistress was being detained .
Dron was of this opinion , but as soon as he expressed it Karp and others attacked their ex - Elder .
" How many years have you been fattening on the commune ? " Karp shouted at him .
" It 's all one to you !
You 'll dig up your pot of money and take it away with you ....
What does it matter to you whether our homes are ruined or not ? "
" We 've been told to keep order , and that no one is to leave their homes or take away a single grain , and that 's all about it ! " cried another .
" It was your son 's turn to be conscripted , but no fear !
You begrudged your lump of a son , " a little old man suddenly began attacking Dron-"and so they took my V'anka to be shaved for a soldier !
But we all have to die . "
" To be sure , we all have to die .
I 'm not against the commune , " said Dron .
" That 's it - not against it !
You 've filled your belly .... "
The two tall peasants had their say .
As soon as Rost'ov , followed by Ily'in , Lavr'ushka , and Alp'atych , came up to the crowd , Karp , thrusting his fingers into his belt and smiling a little , walked to the front .
Dron on the contrary retired to the rear and the crowd drew closer together .
" Who is your Elder here ?
Hey ? " shouted Rost'ov , coming up to the crowd with quick steps .
" The Elder ?
What do you want with him ?
... " asked Karp .
But before the words were well out of his mouth , his cap flew off and a fierce blow jerked his head to one side .
" Caps off , traitors ! " shouted Rost'ov in a wrathful voice .
"
Where 's the Elder ?
" he cried furiously .
" The Elder ....
He wants the Elder ! ...
Dron Zakh'arych , you ! "
meek and flustered voices here and there were heard calling and caps began to come off their heads .
" We do n't riot , we 're following the orders , " declared Karp , and at that moment several voices began speaking together .
" It 's as the old men have decided - there 's too many of you giving orders . "
" Arguing ?
Mutiny ! ...
Brigands !
Traitors ! "
cried Rost'ov unmeaningly in a voice not his own , gripping Karp by the collar .
" Bind him , bind him ! "
he shouted , though there was no one to bind him but Lavr'ushka and Alp'atych .
Lavr'ushka , however , ran up to Karp and seized him by the arms from behind .
" Shall I call up our men from beyond the hill ? " he called out .
Alp'atych turned to the peasants and ordered two of them by name to come and bind Karp .
The men obediently came out of the crowd and began taking off their belts .
" Where 's the Elder ? " demanded Rost'ov in a loud voice .
With a pale and frowning face Dron stepped out of the crowd .
" Are you the Elder ?
Bind him , Lavr'ushka ! "
shouted Rost'ov , as if that order , too , could not possibly meet with any opposition .
And in fact two more peasants began binding Dron , who took off his own belt and handed it to them , as if to aid them .
" And you all listen to me ! "
said Rost'ov to the peasants .
" Be off to your houses at once , and do n't let one of your voices be heard ! "
" Why , we 've not done any harm !
We did it just out of foolishness .
It 's all nonsense ....
I said then that it was not in order
, " voices were heard bickering with one another .
" There ! What did I say ? " said Alp'atych , coming into his own again .
" It 's wrong , lads ! "
" All our stupidity , Y'akov Alp'atych , " came the answers , and the crowd began at once to disperse through the village .
The two bound men were led off to the master 's house .
The two drunken peasants followed them .
" Aye , when I look at you ! ... " said one of them to Karp .
" How can one talk to the masters like that ?
What were you thinking of
, you fool ? " added the other-"A real fool ! "
Two hours later the carts were standing in the courtyard of the Boguch'arovo house .
" Do n't put it in so carelessly , " said one of the peasants , a man with a round smiling face , taking a casket from a housemaid .
" You know it has cost money !
How can you chuck it in like that or shove it under the cord where it 'll get rubbed ?
I do n't like that way of doing things .
Let it all be done properly , according to rule .
Look here , put it under the bast matting and cover it with hay - that 's the way ! "
" Eh , books , books ! " said another peasant , bringing out Prince Andrew 's library cupboards .
" Do n't catch up against it !
It 's heavy , lads - solid books . "
" Yes , they worked all day and did n't play ! " remarked the tall , round - faced peasant gravely , pointing with a significant wink at the dictionaries that were on the top .
Unwilling to obtrude himself on the princess , Rost'ov did not go back to the house but remained in the village awaiting her departure .
When her carriage drove out of the house , he mounted and accompanied her eight miles from Boguch'arovo to where the road was occupied by our troops .
At the inn at Yank'ovo
he respectfully took leave of her , for the first time permitting himself to kiss her hand .
" How can you speak so ! "
he blushingly replied to Princess Mary 's expressions of gratitude for her deliverance , as she termed what had occurred . "
Any police officer would have done as much !
If we had had only peasants to fight , we should not have let the enemy come so far , " said he with a sense of shame and wishing to change the subject .
" I am only happy to have had the opportunity of making your acquaintance .
Good - by , Princess .
I wish you happiness and consolation and hope to meet you again in happier circumstances .
If you do n't want to make me blush , please do n't thank me ! "
But the princess , if she did not again thank him in words , thanked him with the whole expression of her face , radiant with gratitude and tenderness .
She could not believe that there was nothing to thank him for .
His kind , honest eyes , with the tears rising in them when she herself had begun to cry as she spoke of her loss , did not leave her memory .
When she had taken leave of him and remained alone she suddenly felt her eyes filling with tears , and then not for the first time the strange question presented itself to her : did she love him ?
" Well , supposing I do love him ? " thought Princess Mary .
Sometimes when she recalled his looks , his sympathy , and his words , happiness did not appear impossible to her .
It was at those moments that Duny'asha noticed her smiling as she looked out of the carriage window .
" Was it not fate that brought him to Boguch'arovo , and at that very moment ? " thought Princess Mary . "
And that caused his sister to refuse my brother ? "
And in all this Princess Mary saw the hand of Providence .
The impression the princess made on Rost'ov was a very agreeable one .
It made him angry just because the idea of marrying the gentle Princess Mary , who was attractive to him and had an enormous fortune , had against his will more than once entered his head .
But S'onya ?
And his plighted word ?
That was why Rost'ov grew angry when he was rallied about Princess Bolk'onskaya .
CHAPTER XV
On receiving command of the armies Kut'uzov remembered Prince Andrew and sent an order for him to report at headquarters .
Prince Andrew arrived at Ts'arevo - Zaym'ishche on the very day and at the very hour that Kut'uzov was reviewing the troops for the first time .
From the field beyond the village came now sounds of regimental music and now the roar of many voices shouting " Hurrah ! " to the new commander in chief .
Two orderlies , a courier and a major - domo , stood near by , some ten paces from Prince Andrew , availing themselves of Kut'uzov 's absence and of the fine weather .
Prince Andrew replied that he was not on his Serene Highness ' staff but was himself a new arrival .
The lieutenant colonel turned to a smart orderly , who , with the peculiar contempt with which a commander in chief 's orderly speaks to officers , replied :
" What ?
His Serene Highness ?
I expect he 'll be here soon .
What do you want ? "
The lieutenant colonel of hussars smiled beneath his mustache at the orderly 's tone , dismounted , gave his horse to a dispatch runner , and approached Bolk'onski with a slight bow .
Bolk'onski made room for him on the bench and the lieutenant colonel sat down beside him .
" You 're also waiting for the commander in chief ? " said he .
" They say he weceives evewyone , thank God ! ...
It 's awful with those sausage eaters !
Erm'olov had weason to ask to be pwomoted to be a German !
Now p'waps Wussians will get a look in .
As it was , devil only knows what was happening .
We kept wetweating and wetweating .
Did you take part in the campaign ?
" he asked .
I belong to the province of Smol'ensk . "
" Ah ? You 're Pwince Bolk'onski ?
Vewy glad to make your acquaintance !
I 'm Lieutenant Colonel Den'isov , better known as ' V'aska , ' " said Den'isov , pressing Prince Andrew 's hand and looking into his face with a particularly kindly attention . "
Yes , I heard , " said he sympathetically , and after a short pause added : " Yes , it 's Scythian warfare .
It 's all vewy well - only not for those who get it in the neck .
So you are Pwince Andwew Bolk'onski ? "
He swayed his head . "
Vewy pleased , Pwince , to make your acquaintance ! "
he repeated again , smiling sadly , and he again pressed Prince Andrew 's hand .
Prince Andrew knew Den'isov from what Nat'asha had told him of her first suitor .
This memory carried him sadly and sweetly back to those painful feelings of which he had not thought lately , but which still found place in his soul .
He smiled at the recollection of that time and of his love for Nat'asha , and passed at once to what now interested him passionately and exclusively .
This was a plan of campaign he had devised while serving at the outposts during the retreat .
He had proposed that plan to Barclay de Tolly and now wished to propose it to Kut'uzov .
He began explaining his plan to Prince Andrew .
" They ca n't hold all that line .
It 's impossible .
I will undertake to bweak thwough .
Give me five hundwed men and I will bweak the line , that 's certain !
There 's only one way - guewilla warfare ! "
Den'isov rose and began gesticulating as he explained his plan to Bolk'onski .
In the midst of his explanation shouts were heard from the army , growing more incoherent and more diffused , mingling with music and songs and coming from the field where the review was held .
Sounds of hoofs and shouts were nearing the village .
" He 's coming !
He 's coming !
" shouted a Cossack standing at the gate .
Bolk'onski and Den'isov moved to the gate , at which a knot of soldiers ( a guard of honor ) was standing , and they saw Kut'uzov coming down the street mounted on a rather small sorrel horse .
A huge suite of generals rode behind him .
Barclay was riding almost beside him , and a crowd of officers ran after and around them shouting , " Hurrah ! "
His adjutants galloped into the yard before him .
Kut'uzov was impatiently urging on his horse , which ambled smoothly under his weight , and he raised his hand to his white Horse Guard 's cap with a red band and no peak , nodding his head continually .
Suddenly his face assumed a subtle expression , he shrugged his shoulders with an air of perplexity .
" And with such fine fellows to retreat and retreat !
Well , good - by , General , " he added , and rode into the yard past Prince Andrew and Den'isov .
" Hurrah ! hurrah ! hurrah ! " shouted those behind him .
Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kut'uzov had grown still more corpulent , flaccid , and fat .
But the bleached eyeball , the scar , and the familiar weariness of his expression were still the same .
He was wearing the white Horse Guard 's cap and a military overcoat with a whip hanging over his shoulder by a thin strap .
He sat heavily and swayed limply on his brisk little horse .
" Whew ... whew ... whew ! " he whistled just audibly as he rode into the yard .
His face expressed the relief of relaxed strain felt by a man who means to rest after a ceremony .
He pulled himself together , looked round , screwing up his eyes , glanced at Prince Andrew , and , evidently not recognizing him , moved with his waddling gait to the porch . "
Whew ... whew ... whew ! "
he whistled , and again glanced at Prince Andrew .
As often occurs with old men , it was only after some seconds that the impression produced by Prince Andrew 's face linked itself up with Kut'uzov 's remembrance of his personality .
" Ah , how do you do , my dear prince ?
How do you do , my dear boy ?
Come along ... " said he , glancing wearily round , and he stepped onto the porch which creaked under his weight .
He unbuttoned his coat and sat down on a bench in the porch .
" And how 's your father ? "
" I received news of his death , yesterday , " replied Prince Andrew abruptly .
Kut'uzov looked at him with eyes wide open with dismay and then took off his cap and crossed himself :
" May the kingdom of Heaven be his !
God 's will be done to us all ! "
He sighed deeply , his whole chest heaving , and was silent for a while .
" I loved him and respected him , and sympathize with you with all my heart . "
He embraced Prince Andrew , pressing him to his fat breast , and for some time did not let him go .
When he released him Prince Andrew saw that Kut'uzov 's flabby lips were trembling and that tears were in his eyes .
He sighed and pressed on the bench with both hands to raise himself .
" Come !
Come with me , we 'll have a talk , " said he .
Kut'uzov , his hands still pressed on the seat , glanced at him glumly .
Den'isov , having given his name , announced that he had to communicate to his Serene Highness a matter of great importance for their country 's welfare .
Kut'uzov looked wearily at him and , lifting his hands with a gesture of annoyance , folded them across his stomach , repeating the words : " For our country 's welfare ?
Well , what is it ?
Speak ! "
Den'isov came from those parts and knew the country well .
His plan seemed decidedly a good one , especially from the strength of conviction with which he spoke .
Kut'uzov looked down at his own legs , occasionally glancing at the door of the adjoining hut as if expecting something unpleasant to emerge from it .
And from that hut , while Den'isov was speaking , a general with a portfolio under his arm really did appear .
" What ? " said Kut'uzov , in the midst of Den'isov 's explanations , " are you ready so soon ? "
" Ready , your Serene Highness , " replied the general .
Kut'uzov swayed his head , as much as to say : " How is one man to deal with it all ? " and again listened to Den'isov .
" I give my word of honor as a Wussian officer , " said Den'isov , " that I can bweak Napoleon 's line of communication ! "
" What relation are you to Intendant General Kir'il Andr'eevich Den'isov ? " asked Kut'uzov , interrupting him .
" He is my uncle , your Sewene Highness . "
" Ah , we were friends , " said Kut'uzov cheerfully .
" All right , all right , friend , stay here at the staff and tomorrow we 'll have a talk . "
With a nod to Den'isov he turned away and put out his hand for the papers Konovn'itsyn had brought him .
" Would not your Serene Highness like to come inside ? " said the general on duty in a discontented voice , " the plans must be examined and several papers have to be signed . "
An adjutant came out and announced that everything was in readiness within .
But Kut'uzov evidently did not wish to enter that room till he was disengaged .
He made a grimace ....
" No , tell them to bring a small table out here , my dear boy .
I 'll look at them here , " said he .
" Do n't go away , " he added , turning to Prince Andrew , who remained in the porch and listened to the general 's report .
While this was being given , Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a woman 's voice and the rustle of a silk dress behind the door .
Kut'uzov 's adjutant whispered to Prince Andrew that this was the wife of the priest whose home it was , and that she intended to offer his Serene Highness bread and salt . "
Her husband has welcomed his Serene Highness with the cross at the church , and she intends to welcome him in the house ....
She 's very pretty , " added the adjutant with a smile .
At those words Kut'uzov looked round .
All that Den'isov had said was clever and to the point .
He despised them because of his old age and experience of life .
The only instruction Kut'uzov gave of his own accord during that report referred to looting by the Russian troops .
At the end of the report the general put before him for signature a paper relating to the recovery of payment from army commanders for green oats mown down by the soldiers , when landowners lodged petitions for compensation .
After hearing the matter , Kut'uzov smacked his lips together and shook his head .
" Into the stove ... into the fire with it !
I tell you once for all , my dear fellow , " said he , " into the fire with all such things !
Let them cut the crops and burn wood to their hearts ' content .
I do n't order it or allow it , but I do n't exact compensation either .
One ca n't get on without it . '
When wood is chopped the chips will fly . '
" He looked at the paper again . "
Oh , this German precision ! "
he muttered , shaking his head .
CHAPTER XVI
" Well , that 's all ! "
said Kut'uzov as he signed the last of the documents , and rising heavily and smoothing out the folds in his fat white neck he moved toward the door with a more cheerful expression .
He screwed up his eyes , smiled , lifted her chin with his hand , and said :
" Ah , what a beauty !
Thank you , sweetheart ! "
He took some gold pieces from his trouser pocket and put them on the dish for her . "
Well , my dear , and how are we getting on ? "
he asked , moving to the door of the room assigned to him .
The priest 's wife smiled , and with dimples in her rosy cheeks followed him into the room .
The adjutant came out to the porch and asked Prince Andrew to lunch with him .
Half an hour later Prince Andrew was again called to Kut'uzov .
He found him reclining in an armchair , still in the same unbuttoned overcoat .
He had in his hand a French book which he closed as Prince Andrew entered , marking the place with a knife .
Prince Andrew saw by the cover that it was Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis .
" Well , sit down , sit down here .
Let 's have a talk , " said Kut'uzov .
" It 's sad , very sad .
But remember , my dear fellow , that I am a father to you , a second father .... "
Prince Andrew told Kut'uzov all he knew of his father 's death , and what he had seen at Bald Hills when he passed through it .
" What ... what they have brought us to ! "
Kut'uzov suddenly cried in an agitated voice , evidently picturing vividly to himself from Prince Andrew 's story the condition Russia was in . "
But give me time , give me time ! "
he said with a grim look , evidently not wishing to continue this agitating conversation , and added : " I sent for you to keep you with me . "
" I thank your Serene Highness , but I fear I am no longer fit for the staff , " replied Prince Andrew with a smile which Kut'uzov noticed .
Kut'uzov glanced inquiringly at him .
" But above all , " added Prince Andrew , " I have grown used to my regiment , am fond of the officers , and I fancy the men also like me .
I should be sorry to leave the regiment .
If I decline the honor of being with you , believe me ... "
A shrewd , kindly , yet subtly derisive expression lit up Kut'uzov 's podgy face .
He cut Bolk'onski short .
" I am sorry , for I need you .
But you 're right , you 're right !
It 's not here that men are needed .
Advisers are always plentiful , but men are not .
The regiments would not be what they are if the would - be advisers served there as you do .
I remember you at Austerlitz ....
I remember , yes , I remember you with the standard ! "
said Kut'uzov , and a flush of pleasure suffused Prince Andrew 's face at this recollection .
Taking his hand and drawing him downwards , Kut'uzov offered his cheek to be kissed , and again Prince Andrew noticed tears in the old man 's eyes .
" Go your way and God be with you .
I know your path is the path of honor ! "
He paused .
" I missed you at Bucharest , but I needed someone to send . "
And changing the subject , Kut'uzov began to speak of the Turkish war and the peace that had been concluded .
" Yes , I have been much blamed , " he said , " both for that war and the peace ... but everything came at the right time .
Tout vient ` a point ` a celui qui sait attendre .
* And there were as many advisers there as here ... "
he went on , returning to the subject of " advisers " which evidently occupied him . "
Ah , those advisers ! " said he .
" If we had listened to them all we should not have made peace with Turkey and should not have been through with that war .
Everything in haste , but more haste , less speed .
K'amenski would have been lost if he had not died .
He stormed fortresses with thirty thousand men .
It is not difficult to capture a fortress but it is difficult to win a campaign .
For that , not storming and attacking but patience and time are wanted .
K'amenski sent soldiers to Rustchuk , but I only employed these two things and took more fortresses than K'amenski and made them Turks eat horseflesh ! "
He swayed his head . "
And the French shall too , believe me , " he went on , growing warmer and beating his chest , " I 'll make them eat horseflesh ! "
And tears again dimmed his eyes .
* " Everything comes in time to him who knows how to wait . "
" But sha n't we have to accept battle ? " remarked Prince Andrew .
" We shall if everybody wants it ; it ca n't be helped ....
But believe me , my dear boy , there is nothing stronger than those two : patience and time , they will do it all .
But the advisers n'entendent pas de cette oreille , voil`a le mal .
*
Some want a thing - others do n't .
What 's one to do ?
" he asked , evidently expecting an answer . "
Well , what do you want us to do ?
" he repeated and his eye shone with a deep , shrewd look .
" I 'll tell you what to do , " he continued , as Prince Andrew still did not reply : " I will tell you what to do , and what I do .
Dans le doute , mon cher , " he paused , " abstiens - toi " * ( 2)-he articulated the French proverb deliberately .
* " Do n't see it that way , that 's the trouble . "
* ( 2 ) " When in doubt , my dear fellow , do nothing . "
If you want anything come straight to me .
Good - by , my dear boy . "
Again he embraced and kissed Prince Andrew , but before the latter had left the room Kut'uzov gave a sigh of relief and went on with his unfinished novel , Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis .
Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was , but after that interview with Kut'uzov
he went back to his regiment reassured as to the general course of affairs and as to the man to whom it had been entrusted .
He will not bring in any plan of his own .
He will not devise or undertake anything , " thought Prince Andrew , " but he will hear everything , remember everything , and put everything in its place .
He will not hinder anything useful nor allow anything harmful .
On such feelings , more or less dimly shared by all , the unanimity and general approval were founded with which , despite court influences , the popular choice of Kut'uzov as commander in chief was received .
CHAPTER XVII
In solitude a man generally listens to the first voice , but in society to the second .
So it was now with the inhabitants of Moscow .
It was long since people had been as gay in Moscow as that year .
They are all dwarfs and one peasant woman will toss three of them with a hayfork . "
Others did not like that tone and said it was stupid and vulgar .
The foreigners were deported to N'izhni by boat , and Rostopch'in had said to them in French : " Rentrez en vous - m^emes ; entrez dans la barque , et n'en faites pas une barque de Charon . "
* There was talk of all the government offices having been already removed from Moscow , and to this Shinsh'in 's witticism was added - that for that alone Moscow ought to be grateful to Napoleon .
* " Think it over ; get into the barque , and take care not to make it a barque of Charon . "
" You do n't spare anyone , " said Julie Drubetsk'aya as she collected and pressed together a bunch of raveled lint with her thin , beringed fingers .
Julie was preparing to leave Moscow next day and was giving a farewell soiree .
" Bez'ukhov est ridicule , but he is so kind and good - natured .
What pleasure is there to be so caustique ? "
" A forfeit ! " cried a young man in militia uniform whom Julie called " mon chevalier , " and who was going with her to N'izhni .
" Another forfeit for a Gallicism , " said a Russian writer who was present .
" ' What pleasure is there to be ' is not Russian ! "
" You spare no one , " continued Julie to the young man without heeding the author 's remark .
" For caustique - I am guilty and will pay , and I am prepared to pay again for the pleasure of telling you the truth .
" Ah , here he is ! "
she added . "
Quand on ...
No , no , " she said to the militia officer , " you wo n't catch me .
Speak of the sun and you see its rays ! "
and she smiled amiably at Pierre .
" We were just talking of you , " she said with the facility in lying natural to a society woman .
" We were saying that your regiment would be sure to be better than Mam'onov 's . "
" Oh , do n't talk to me of my regiment , " replied Pierre , kissing his hostess ' hand and taking a seat beside her .
" I am so sick of it . "
" You will , of course , command it yourself ? " said Julie , directing a sly , sarcastic glance toward the militia officer .
The latter in Pierre 's presence had ceased to be caustic , and his face expressed perplexity as to what Julie 's smile might mean .
In spite of his absent - mindedness and good nature , Pierre 's personality immediately checked any attempt to ridicule him to his face .
" No , " said Pierre , with a laughing glance at his big , stout body .
" I should make too good a target for the French , besides I am afraid I should hardly be able to climb onto a horse . "
Among those whom Julie 's guests happened to choose to gossip about were the Rost'ovs .
" I hear that their affairs are in a very bad way , " said Julie .
" And he is so unreasonable , the count himself I mean .
The Razum'ovskis wanted to buy his house and his estate near Moscow , but it drags on and on .
He asks too much . "
" No , I think the sale will come off in a few days , " said someone .
"
Though it is madness to buy anything in Moscow now . "
" Why ? " asked Julie .
" You do n't think Moscow is in danger ? "
" Then why are you leaving ? "
" I ?
What a question !
I am going because ...
well , because everyone is going : and besides - I am not Joan of Arc or an Amazon . "
" Well , of course , of course !
Let me have some more strips of linen . "
" If he manages the business properly he will be able to pay off all his debts , " said the militia officer , speaking of Rost'ov .
" A kindly old man but not up to much .
And why do they stay on so long in Moscow ?
They meant to leave for the country long ago .
Natalie is quite well again now , is n't she ? "
Julie asked Pierre with a knowing smile .
" They are waiting for their younger son , " Pierre replied .
" He joined Obol'enski 's Cossacks and went to B'elaya Ts'erkov where the regiment is being formed .
But now they have had him transferred to my regiment and are expecting him every day .
The count wanted to leave long ago , but the countess wo n't on any account leave Moscow till her son returns . "
" I met them the day before yesterday at the Arkh'arovs ' .
Natalie has recovered her looks and is brighter .
She sang a song .
How easily some people get over everything ! "
" Get over what ? " inquired Pierre , looking displeased .
Julie smiled .
" You know , Count , such knights as you are only found in Madame de Souza 's novels . "
" What knights ?
What do you mean ? " demanded Pierre , blushing .
" Oh , come , my dear count !
C'est la fable de tout Moscou .
Je vous admire , ma parole d'honneur ! "
*
* " It is the talk of all Moscow .
My word , I admire you ! "
" Forfeit , forfeit ! " cried the militia officer .
" All right , one ca n't talk - how tiresome ! "
" What is ' the talk of all Moscow ' ? "
Pierre asked angrily , rising to his feet .
" Come now , Count , you know ! "
" I do n't know anything about it , " said Pierre .
" I know you were friendly with Natalie , and so ... but I was always more friendly with V'era - that dear V'era . "
" No , madame ! "
Pierre continued in a tone of displeasure , " I have not taken on myself the role of Natalie Rost'ova 's knight at all , and have not been to their house for nearly a month .
But I can not understand the cruelty ... "
" Qui s'excuse s'accuse , " * said Julie , smiling and waving the lint triumphantly , and to have the last word she promptly changed the subject .
"
Do you know what I heard today ?
Poor Mary Bolk'onskaya arrived in Moscow yesterday .
Do you know that she has lost her father ? "
* " Who excuses himself , accuses himself . "
" Really ?
Where is she ?
I should like very much to see her , " said Pierre .
" I spent the evening with her yesterday .
She is going to their estate near Moscow either today or tomorrow morning , with her nephew . "
" Well , and how is she ? " asked Pierre .
" She is well , but sad .
But do you know who rescued her ?
It is quite a romance .
Nicholas Rost'ov !
She was surrounded , and they wanted to kill her and had wounded some of her people .
He rushed in and saved her .... "
" Another romance , " said the militia officer .
" Really , this general flight has been arranged to get all the old maids married off .
Catiche is one and Princess Bolk'onskaya another . "
" Do you know , I really believe she is un petit peu amoureuse du jeune homme . " *
* " A little bit in love with the young man . "
" Forfeit , forfeit , forfeit ! "
" But how could one say that in Russian ? "
CHAPTER XVIII
When Pierre returned home he was handed two of Rostopch'in 's broadsheets that had been brought that day .
The first declared that the report that Count Rostopch'in had forbidden people to leave Moscow was false ; on the contrary he was glad that ladies and tradesmen 's wives were leaving the city .
" There will be less panic and less gossip , " ran the broadsheet " but I will stake my life on it that that scoundrel will not enter Moscow . "
These words showed Pierre clearly for the first time that the French would enter Moscow .
The tone of the proclamation was not as jocose as in the former Chig'irin talks .
Pierre pondered over these broadsheets .
Evidently the terrible stormcloud he had desired with the whole strength of his soul but which yet aroused involuntary horror in him was drawing near .
" Shall I join the army and enter the service , or wait ? " he asked himself for the hundredth time .
He took a pack of cards that lay on the table and began to lay them out for a game of patience .
" If this patience comes out , " he said to himself after shuffling the cards , holding them in his hand , and lifting his head , " if it comes out , it means ...
what does it mean ? "
He had not decided what it should mean when he heard the voice of the eldest princess at the door asking whether she might come in .
" Then it will mean that I must go to the army , " said Pierre to himself .
" Come in , come in ! "
he added to the princess .
Only the eldest princess , the one with the stony face and long waist , was still living in Pierre 's house .
The two younger ones had both married .
" Excuse my coming to you , cousin , " she said in a reproachful and agitated voice . "
You know some decision must be come to .
What is going to happen ?
Everyone has left Moscow and the people are rioting .
How is it that we are staying on ? "
" On the contrary , things seem satisfactory , ma cousine , " said Pierre in the bantering tone he habitually adopted toward her , always feeling uncomfortable in the role of her benefactor .
" Satisfactory , indeed !
Very satisfactory !
Barbara Iv'anovna told me today how our troops are distinguishing themselves .
It certainly does them credit !
And the people too are quite mutinous -
they no longer obey ,
even my maid has taken to being rude .
At this rate they will soon begin beating us .
One ca n't walk in the streets .
But , above all , the French will be here any day now , so what are we waiting for ?
I ask just one thing of you , cousin , " she went on , " arrange for me to be taken to Petersburg .
Whatever I may be , I ca n't live under Bonaparte 's rule . "
" Oh , come , ma cousine !
Where do you get your information from ?
On the contrary ... "
" I wo n't submit to your Napoleon !
Others may if they please ....
If you do n't want to do this ... "
" But I will , I 'll give the order at once . "
The princess was apparently vexed at not having anyone to be angry with .
Muttering to herself , she sat down on a chair .
" But you have been misinformed , " said Pierre .
" Everything is quiet in the city and there is not the slightest danger .
See !
I 've just been reading ... "
He showed her the broadsheet . "
Count Rostopch'in writes that he will stake his life on it that the enemy will not enter Moscow . "
" Oh , that count of yours ! " said the princess malevolently .
" He is a hypocrite , a rascal who has himself roused the people to riot .
Did n't he write in those idiotic broadsheets that anyone , ' whoever it might be , should be dragged to the lockup by his hair ' ?
( How silly ! ) '
And honor and glory to whoever captures him , ' he says .
This is what his cajolery has brought us to !
Barbara Iv'anovna told me the mob near killed her because she said something in French . "
" Oh , but it 's so ...
You take everything so to heart , " said Pierre , and began laying out his cards for patience .
Next day toward evening the princess set off , and Pierre 's head steward came to inform him that the money needed for the equipment of his regiment could not be found without selling one of the estates .
In general the head steward made out to Pierre that his project of raising a regiment would ruin him .
Pierre listened to him , scarcely able to repress a smile .
" Well then , sell it , " said he .
" What 's to be done ?
I ca n't draw back now ! "
The worse everything became , especially his own affairs , the better was Pierre pleased and the more evident was it that the catastrophe he expected was approaching .
Hardly anyone he knew was left in town .
Julie had gone , and so had Princess Mary .
Of his intimate friends only the Rost'ovs remained , but he did not go to see them .
To distract his thoughts he drove that day to the village of Voronts'ovo to see the great balloon Leppich was constructing to destroy the foe , and a trial balloon that was to go up next day .
The balloon was not yet ready , but Pierre learned that it was being constructed by the Emperor 's desire .
The Emperor had written to Count Rostopch'in as follows :
As soon as Leppich is ready , get together a crew of reliable and intelligent men for his car and send a courier to General Kut'uzov to let him know .
I have informed him of the matter .
Please impress upon Leppich to be very careful where he descends for the first time , that he may not make a mistake and fall into the enemy 's hands .
It is essential for him to combine his movements with those of the commander in chief .
On his way home from Voronts'ovo , as he was passing the Bol'otnoe Place Pierre , seeing a large crowd round the L'obnoe Place , stopped and got out of his trap .
A French cook accused of being a spy was being flogged .
The flogging was only just over , and the executioner was releasing from the flogging bench a stout man with red whiskers , in blue stockings and a green jacket , who was moaning piteously .
Another criminal , thin and pale , stood near .
Judging by their faces they were both Frenchmen .
With a frightened and suffering look resembling that on the thin Frenchman 's face , Pierre pushed his way in through the crowd .
" What is it ?
Who is it ?
What is it for ?
" he kept asking .
But the attention of the crowd - officials , burghers , shopkeepers , peasants , and women in cloaks and in pelisses - was so eagerly centered on what was passing in L'obnoe Place that no one answered him .
In the crowd people began talking loudly , to stifle their feelings of pity as it seemed to Pierre .
" He 's cook to some prince . "
" Eh , mounseer , Russian sauce seems to be sour to a Frenchman ... sets his teeth on edge ! " said a wrinkled clerk who was standing behind Pierre , when the Frenchman began to cry .
The clerk glanced round , evidently hoping that his joke would be appreciated .
Some people began to laugh , others continued to watch in dismay the executioner who was undressing the other man .
Pierre choked , his face puckered , and he turned hastily away , went back to his trap muttering something to himself as he went , and took his seat .
As they drove along he shuddered and exclaimed several times so audibly that the coachman asked him :
" What is your pleasure ? "
" Where are you going ? " shouted Pierre to the man , who was driving to Luby'anka Street .
" To the Governor 's , as you ordered , " answered the coachman .
" Fool !
Idiot ! "
shouted Pierre , abusing his coachman - a thing he rarely did .
" Home , I told you !
And drive faster , blockhead ! "
" I must get away this very day , " he murmured to himself .
This could not all be arranged that day , so on Evst'afey 's representation Pierre had to put off his departure till next day to allow time for the relay horses to be sent on in advance .
On the twenty - fourth the weather cleared up after a spell of rain , and after dinner Pierre left Moscow .
When changing horses that night in Perkh'ushkovo , he learned that there had been a great battle that evening .
( This was the battle of Shev'ardino . )
He was told that there in Perkh'ushkovo the earth trembled from the firing , but nobody could answer his questions as to who had won .
At dawn next day Pierre was approaching Mozh'aysk .
Every house in Mozh'aysk had soldiers quartered in it , and at the hostel where Pierre was met by his groom and coachman there was no room to be had .
It was full of officers .
Everywhere in Mozh'aysk and beyond it , troops were stationed or on the march .
Cossacks , foot and horse soldiers , wagons , caissons , and cannon were everywhere .
It was a feeling akin to what he had felt at the Slob'oda Palace during the Emperor 's visit - a sense of the necessity of undertaking something and sacrificing something .
He now experienced a glad consciousness that everything that constitutes men 's happiness - the comforts of life , wealth , even life itself - is rubbish it is pleasant to throw away , compared with something ...
With what ?
Pierre could not say , and he did not try to determine for whom and for what he felt such particular delight in sacrificing everything .
He was not occupied with the question of what to sacrifice for ; the fact of sacrificing in itself afforded him a new and joyous sensation .
CHAPTER XIX
Why and how were the battles of Shev'ardino and Borodin'o given and accepted ?
Why was the battle of Borodin'o fought ?
There was not the least sense in it for either the French or the Russians .
What the result must be was quite obvious , and yet Napoleon offered and Kut'uzov accepted that battle .
For Kut'uzov this was mathematically clear , as it is that if when playing draughts I have one man less and go on exchanging , I shall certainly lose , and therefore should not exchange .
When my opponent has sixteen men and I have fourteen , I am only one eighth weaker than he , but when I have exchanged thirteen more men he will be three times as strong as I am .
If it is said that he expected to end the campaign by occupying Moscow as he had ended a previous campaign by occupying Vienna , there is much evidence to the contrary .
In giving and accepting battle at Borodin'o , Kut'uzov acted involuntarily and irrationally .
But later on , to fit what had occurred , the historians provided cunningly devised evidence of the foresight and genius of the generals who , of all the blind tools of history were the most enslaved and involuntary .
On the other question , how the battle of Borodin'o and the preceding battle of Shev'ardino were fought , there also exists a definite and well - known , but quite false , conception .
All the historians describe the affair as follows :
The Russian army , they say , in its retreat from Smol'ensk sought out for itself the best position for a general engagement and found such a position at Borodin'o .
In front of this position , they say , a fortified outpost was set up on the Shev'ardino mound to observe the enemy .
So the histories say , and it is all quite wrong , as anyone who cares to look into the matter can easily convince himself .
The Russians did not seek out the best position but , on the contrary , during the retreat passed many positions better than Borodin'o .
That redoubt was quite senseless in front of the position where the battle was accepted .
Why was it more strongly fortified than any other post ?
And why were all efforts exhausted and six thousand men sacrificed to defend it till late at night on the twenty - fourth ?
A Cossack patrol would have sufficed to observe the enemy .
Napoleon , riding to Val'uevo on the twenty - fourth , did not see ( as the history books say he did )
the position of the Russians from Ut'itsa to Borodin'o
In that case we should probably have defended the Shev'ardino Redoubt - our left flank - still more obstinately .
We should have attacked Napoleon in the center or on the right , and the engagement would have taken place on the twenty - fifth , in the position we intended and had fortified .
So it happened that throughout the whole battle the Russians opposed the entire French army launched against our left flank with but half as many men .
( Poniatowski 's action against Ut'itsa , and Uv'arov 's on the right flank against the French , were actions distinct from the main course of the battle . )
So the battle of Borodin'o did not take place at all as ( in an effort to conceal our commanders ' mistakes even at the cost of diminishing the glory due to the Russian army and people )
it has been described .
CHAPTER XX
On the morning of the twenty - fifth Pierre was leaving Mozh'aysk .
Behind him a cavalry regiment was coming down the hill preceded by its singers .
Coming up toward him was a train of carts carrying men who had been wounded in the engagement the day before .
The peasant drivers , shouting and lashing their horses , kept crossing from side to side .
The carts , in each of which three or four wounded soldiers were lying or sitting , jolted over the stones that had been thrown on the steep incline to make it something like a road .
The wounded , bandaged with rags , with pale cheeks , compressed lips , and knitted brows , held on to the sides of the carts as they were jolted against one another .
Almost all of them stared with na"ive , childlike curiosity at Pierre 's white hat and green swallow - tail coat .
Pierre 's coachman shouted angrily at the convoy of wounded to keep to one side of the road .
The cavalry regiment , as it descended the hill with its singers , surrounded Pierre 's carriage and blocked the road .
Pierre stopped , being pressed against the side of the cutting in which the road ran .
The sunshine from behind the hill did not penetrate into the cutting and there it was cold and damp , but above Pierre 's head was the bright August sunshine and the bells sounded merrily .
One of the carts with wounded stopped by the side of the road close to Pierre .
The driver in his bast shoes ran panting up to it , placed a stone under one of its tireless hind wheels , and began arranging the breech - band on his little horse .
One of the wounded , an old soldier with a bandaged arm who was following the cart on foot , caught hold of it with his sound hand and turned to look at Pierre .
" I say , fellow countryman !
Will they set us down here or take us on to Moscow ? "
he asked .
Pierre was so deep in thought that he did not hear the question .
He was looking now at the cavalry regiment that had met the convoy of wounded , now at the cart by which he was standing , in which two wounded men were sitting and one was lying .
One of those sitting up in the cart had probably been wounded in the cheek .
His whole head was wrapped in rags and one cheek was swollen to the size of a baby 's head .
His nose and mouth were twisted to one side .
This soldier was looking at the cathedral and crossing himself .
Another , a young lad , a fair - haired recruit as white as though there was no blood in his thin face , looked at Pierre kindly , with a fixed smile .
The third lay prone so that his face was not visible .
The cavalry singers were passing close by :
Ah lost , quite lost ... is my head so keen , Living in a foreign land ...
they sang their soldiers ' dance song .
But beneath the slope , by the cart with the wounded near the panting little nag where Pierre stood , it was damp , somber , and sad .
The soldier with the swollen cheek looked angrily at the cavalry singers .
" Oh , the coxcombs ! "
he muttered reproachfully .
" It 's not the soldiers only , but I 've seen peasants today , too ....
The peasants - even they have to go , " said the soldier behind the cart , addressing Pierre with a sad smile . "
No distinctions made nowadays ....
They want the whole nation to fall on them - in a word , it 's Moscow !
They want to make an end of it . "
In spite of the obscurity of the soldier 's words Pierre understood what he wanted to say and nodded approval .
The road was clear again ; Pierre descended the hill and drove on .
Having gone nearly three miles he at last met an acquaintance and eagerly addressed him .
This was one of the head army doctors .
He was driving toward Pierre in a covered gig , sitting beside a young surgeon , and on recognizing Pierre he told the Cossack who occupied the driver 's seat to pull up .
" Count !
Your excellency , how come you to be here ?
" asked the doctor .
" Well , you know , I wanted to see ... "
" Yes , yes , there will be something to see .... "
Pierre got out and talked to the doctor , explaining his intention of taking part in a battle .
The doctor advised him to apply direct to Kut'uzov .
" Why should you be God knows where out of sight , during the battle ? " he said , exchanging glances with his young companion . "
Anyhow his Serene Highness knows you and will receive you graciously .
That 's what you must do . "
The doctor seemed tired and in a hurry .
" You think so ? ...
Ah , I also wanted to ask you where our position is exactly ? " said Pierre .
" The position ? " repeated the doctor . "
Well , that 's not my line .
Drive past Tat'arinova , a lot of digging is going on there .
Go up the hillock and you 'll see . "
" Can one see from there ? ...
If you would ... "
But the doctor interrupted him and moved toward his gig .
" I would go with you but on my honor
I 'm up to here
"-
and he pointed to his throat .
" I 'm galloping to the commander of the corps .
How do matters stand ? ...
You know , Count , there 'll be a battle tomorrow .
Out of an army of a hundred thousand we must expect at least twenty thousand wounded , and we have n't stretchers , or bunks , or dressers , or doctors enough for six thousand .
We have ten thousand carts , but we need other things as well
- we must manage as best we can ! "
" They may die tomorrow ; why are they thinking of anything but death ? "
" The cavalry ride to battle and meet the wounded and do not for a moment think of what awaits them , but pass by , winking at the wounded .
Yet from among these men twenty thousand are doomed to die , and they wonder at my hat !
Strange ! " thought Pierre , continuing his way to Tat'arinova .
In front of a landowner 's house to the left of the road stood carriages , wagons , and crowds of orderlies and sentinels .
The commander in chief was putting up there , but just when Pierre arrived he was not in and hardly any of the staff were there - they had gone to the church service .
Pierre drove on toward G'orki .
Some of them were digging , others were wheeling barrowloads of earth along planks , while others stood about doing nothing .
Two officers were standing on the knoll , directing the men .
CHAPTER XXI
Pierre stepped out of his carriage and , passing the toiling militiamen , ascended the knoll from which , according to the doctor , the battlefield could be seen .
It was about eleven o'clock .
The sun shone somewhat to the left and behind him and brightly lit up the enormous panorama which , rising like an amphitheater , extended before him in the clear rarefied atmosphere .
From above on the left , bisecting that amphitheater , wound the Smol'ensk highroad , passing through a village with a white church some five hundred paces in front of the knoll and below it .
This was Borodin'o .
Below the village the road crossed the river by a bridge and , winding down and up , rose higher and higher to the village of Val'uevo visible about four miles away , where Napoleon was then stationed .
Beyond Val'uevo the road disappeared into a yellowing forest on the horizon .
Far in the distance in that birch and fir forest to the right of the road , the cross and belfry of the Koloch'a Monastery gleamed in the sun .
Here and there over the whole of that blue expanse , to right and left of the forest and the road , smoking campfires could be seen and indefinite masses of troops - ours and the enemy 's .
The ground to the right - along the course of the Koloch'a and Moskv'a rivers - was broken and hilly .
Between the hollows the villages of Bez'ubova and Zakh'arino showed in the distance .
On the left the ground was more level ; there were fields of grain , and the smoking ruins of Sem"enovsk , which had been burned down , could be seen .
All that Pierre saw was so indefinite that neither the left nor the right side of the field fully satisfied his expectations .
" I must ask someone who knows , " he thought , and addressed an officer who was looking with curiosity at his huge unmilitary figure .
" May I ask you , " said Pierre , " what village that is in front ? "
" B'urdino , is n't it ? " said the officer , turning to his companion .
" Borodin'o , " the other corrected him .
The officer , evidently glad of an opportunity for a talk , moved up to Pierre .
" Are those our men there ? "
Pierre inquired .
" Yes , and there , further on , are the French , " said the officer .
" There they are , there ... you can see them . "
" Where ?
Where ? " asked Pierre .
" One can see them with the naked eye ...
Why , there ! "
" Ah , those are the French !
And over there ? ...
" Pierre pointed to a knoll on the left , near which some troops could be seen .
" Those are ours . "
" Ah , ours !
And there ? ... " Pierre pointed to another knoll in the distance with a big tree on it , near a village that lay in a hollow where also some campfires were smoking and something black was visible .
" That 's his again , " said the officer .
( It was the Shev'ardino Redoubt . )
" It was ours yesterday , but now it is his . "
" Then how about our position ? "
" Our position ? " replied the officer with a smile of satisfaction . "
I can tell you quite clearly , because I constructed nearly all our entrenchments .
There , you see ?
There 's our center , at Borodin'o , just there , " and he pointed to the village in front of them with the white church .
" That 's where one crosses the Koloch'a .
You see down there where the rows of hay are lying in the hollow , there 's the bridge .
That 's our center .
Our right flank is over there "- he pointed sharply to the right , far away in the broken ground-"That 's where the Moskv'a River is , and we have thrown up three redoubts there , very strong ones .
The left flank ... " here the officer paused . "
Well , you see , that 's difficult to explain ....
That 's Sem"enovsk , yes , there , " he pointed to Ra'evski 's knoll . "
But the battle will hardly be there .
His having moved his troops there is only a ruse ; he will probably pass round to the right of the Moskv'a .
But wherever it may be , many a man will be missing tomorrow !
" he remarked .
An elderly sergeant who had approached the officer while he was giving these explanations had waited in silence for him to finish speaking , but at this point , evidently not liking the officer 's remark , interrupted him .
" Gabions must be sent for , " said he sternly .
The officer appeared abashed , as though he understood that one might think of how many men would be missing tomorrow but ought not to speak of it .
" Well , send number three company again , " the officer replied hurriedly .
" And you , are you one of the doctors ? "
" No , I 've come on my own , " answered Pierre , and he went down the hill again , passing the militiamen .
" Oh , those damned fellows ! "
muttered the officer who followed him , holding his nose as he ran past the men at work .
" There they are ... bringing her , coming ...
There they are ...
They 'll be here in a minute ...
" voices were suddenly heard saying ; and officers , soldiers , and militiamen began running forward along the road .
A church procession was coming up the hill from Borodin'o .
First along the dusty road came the infantry in ranks , bareheaded and with arms reversed .
From behind them came the sound of church singing .
Soldiers and militiamen ran bareheaded past Pierre toward the procession .
" They are bringing her , our Protectress ! ...
The Iberian Mother of God ! "
someone cried .
" The Smol'ensk Mother of God , " another corrected him .
The militiamen , both those who had been in the village and those who had been at work on the battery , threw down their spades and ran to meet the church procession .
Following the battalion that marched along the dusty road came priests in their vestments - one little old man in a hood with attendants and singers .
Behind them soldiers and officers bore a large , dark - faced icon with an embossed metal cover .
This was the icon that had been brought from Smol'ensk and had since accompanied the army .
Behind , before , and on both sides , crowds of militiamen with bared heads walked , ran , and bowed to the ground .
The hot rays of the sun beat down vertically and a fresh soft wind played with the hair of the bared heads and with the ribbons decorating the icon .
The singing did not sound loud under the open sky .
An immense crowd of bareheaded officers , soldiers , and militiamen surrounded the icon .
Behind the priest and a chanter stood the notabilities on a spot reserved for them .
Another general stood in a martial pose , crossing himself by shaking his hand in front of his chest while looking about him .
The crowd round the icon suddenly parted and pressed against Pierre .
Someone , a very important personage judging by the haste with which way was made for him , was approaching the icon .
It was Kut'uzov , who had been riding round the position and on his way back to Tat'arinova had stopped where the service was being held .
Pierre recognized him at once by his peculiar figure , which distinguished him from everybody else .
He crossed himself with an accustomed movement , bent till he touched the ground with his hand , and bowed his white head with a deep sigh .
Behind Kut'uzov was Bennigsen and the suite .
Despite the presence of the commander in chief , who attracted the attention of all the superior officers , the militiamen and soldiers continued their prayers without looking at him .
His white head twitched with the effort .
At last he rose , kissed the icon as a child does with na"ively pouting lips , and again bowed till he touched the ground with his hand .
The other generals followed his example , then the officers , and after them with excited faces , pressing on one another , crowding , panting , and pushing , scrambled the soldiers and militiamen .
CHAPTER XXII
Staggering amid the crush , Pierre looked about him .
" Count Peter Kir'ilovich !
How did you get here ? " said a voice .
Pierre looked round .
Bor'is Drubetsk'oy , brushing his knees with his hand
( he had probably soiled them when he , too , had knelt before the icon ) , came up to him smiling .
Bor'is was elegantly dressed , with a slightly martial touch appropriate to a campaign .
He wore a long coat and like Kut'uzov had a whip slung across his shoulder .
Meanwhile Kut'uzov had reached the village and seated himself in the shade of the nearest house , on a bench which one Cossack had run to fetch and another had hastily covered with a rug .
An immense and brilliant suite surrounded him .
The icon was carried further , accompanied by the throng .
Pierre stopped some thirty paces from Kut'uzov , talking to Bor'is .
He explained his wish to be present at the battle and to see the position .
" This is what you must do , " said Bor'is .
" I will do the honors of the camp to you .
You will see everything best from where Count Bennigsen will be .
I am in attendance on him , you know ; I 'll mention it to him .
But if you want to ride round the position , come along with us .
We are just going to the left flank .
Then when we get back , do spend the night with me and we 'll arrange a game of cards .
Of course you know Dm'itri Serg'eevich ?
Those are his quarters , " and he pointed to the third house in the village of G'orki .
" But I should like to see the right flank .
They say it 's very strong , " said Pierre .
" I should like to start from the Moskv'a River and ride round the whole position . "
" Well , you can do that later , but the chief thing is the left flank . "
" Yes , yes .
But where is Prince Bolk'onski 's regiment ?
Can you point it out to me ? "
" Prince Andrew 's ?
We shall pass it
and I 'll take you to him . "
" What about the left flank ? " asked Pierre
" To tell you the truth , between ourselves , God only knows what state our left flank is in , " said Bor'is confidentially lowering his voice .
" It is not at all what Count Bennigsen intended .
He meant to fortify that knoll quite differently , but ... " Bor'is shrugged his shoulders , " his Serene Highness would not have it , or someone persuaded him .
You see ... "
but Bor'is did not finish , for at that moment Kays'arov , Kut'uzov 's adjutant , came up to Pierre . "
Ah , Kays'arov ! "
said Bor'is , addressing him with an unembarrassed smile , " I was just trying to explain our position to the count .
It is amazing how his Serene Highness could so foresee the intentions of the French ! "
" You mean the left flank ? " asked Kays'arov .
" Yes , exactly ; the left flank is now extremely strong . "
Though Kut'uzov had dismissed all unnecessary men from the staff , Bor'is had contrived to remain at headquarters after the changes .
He had established himself with Count Bennigsen , who , like all on whom Bor'is had been in attendance , considered young Prince Drubetsk'oy an invaluable man .
In the higher command there were two sharply defined parties : Kut'uzov 's party and that of Bennigsen , the chief of staff .
Bor'is belonged to the latter and no one else , while showing servile respect to Kut'uzov , could so create an impression that the old fellow was not much good and that Bennigsen managed everything .
Now the decisive moment of battle had come when Kut'uzov would be destroyed and the power pass to Bennigsen , or even if Kut'uzov won the battle it would be felt that everything was done by Bennigsen .
In any case many great rewards would have to be given for tomorrow 's action , and new men would come to the front .
So Bor'is was full of nervous vivacity all day .
Kut'uzov noticed Pierre 's figure and the group gathered round him .
" Call him to me , " said Kut'uzov .
An adjutant told Pierre of his Serene Highness ' wish , and Pierre went toward Kut'uzov 's bench .
But a militiaman got there before him .
It was D'olokhov .
" How did that fellow get here ? " asked Pierre .
" He 's a creature that wriggles in anywhere ! " was the answer . "
He has been degraded , you know .
Now he wants to bob up again .
He 's been proposing some scheme or other and has crawled into the enemy 's picket line at night ....
He 's a brave fellow . "
Pierre took off his hat and bowed respectfully to Kut'uzov .
" I concluded that if I reported to your Serene Highness you might send me away or say that you knew what I was reporting , but then I should n't lose anything ... " D'olokhov was saying .
" Yes , yes . "
" But if I were right , I should be rendering a service to my Fatherland for which I am ready to die . "
" Yes , yes . "
" And should your Serene Highness require a man who will not spare his skin , please think of me ....
Perhaps I may prove useful to your Serene Highness . "
" Yes ... Yes ... " Kut'uzov repeated , his laughing eye narrowing more and more as he looked at Pierre .
Just then Bor'is , with his courtierlike adroitness , stepped up to Pierre 's side near Kut'uzov and in a most natural manner , without raising his voice , said to Pierre , as though continuing an interrupted conversation :
" The militia have put on clean white shirts to be ready to die .
What heroism , Count ! "
Bor'is evidently said this to Pierre in order to be overheard by his Serene Highness .
He knew Kut'uzov 's attention would be caught by those words , and so it was .
" What are you saying about the militia ? " he asked Bor'is .
" Preparing for tomorrow , your Serene Highness - for death - they have put on clean shirts . "
" Ah ... a wonderful , a matchless people ! " said Kut'uzov ; and he closed his eyes and swayed his head . "
A matchless people ! "
he repeated with a sigh .
" So you want to smell gunpowder ? " he said to Pierre . "
Yes , it 's a pleasant smell .
I have the honor to be one of your wife 's adorers .
Is she well ?
My quarters are at your service . "
And as often happens with old people , Kut'uzov began looking about absent - mindedly as if forgetting all he wanted to say or do .
Then , evidently remembering what he wanted , he beckoned to Andrew Kays'arov , his adjutant 's brother .
" Those verses ... those verses of M'arin 's ... how do they go , eh ?
Those he wrote about Ger'akov : ' Lectures for the corps inditing ' ...
Recite them , recite them ! "
said he , evidently preparing to laugh .
Kays'arov recited .... Kut'uzov smilingly nodded his head to the rhythm of the verses .
When Pierre had left Kut'uzov , D'olokhov came up to him and took his hand .
" I am very glad to meet you here , Count , " he said aloud , regardless of the presence of strangers and in a particularly resolute and solemn tone . "
I beg you to forgive me . "
Pierre looked at D'olokhov with a smile , not knowing what to say to him .
With tears in his eyes D'olokhov embraced Pierre and kissed him .
Bor'is said a few words to his general , and Count Bennigsen turned to Pierre and proposed that he should ride with him along the line .
" It will interest you , " said he .
" Yes , very much , " replied Pierre .
Half an hour later Kut'uzov left for Tat'arinova , and Bennigsen and his suite , with Pierre among them , set out on their ride along the line .
CHAPTER XXIII
They rode across that bridge into the village of Borodin'o and thence turned to the left , passing an enormous number of troops and guns , and came to a high knoll where militiamen were digging .
This was the redoubt , as yet unnamed , which afterwards became known as the Ra'evski Redoubt , or the Knoll Battery , but Pierre paid no special attention to it .
He did not know that it would become more memorable to him than any other spot on the plain of Borodin'o .
They then crossed the hollow to Sem"enovsk , where the soldiers were dragging away the last logs from the huts and barns .
* A kind of entrenchment .
At the fl`eches Bennigsen stopped and began looking at the Shev'ardino Redoubt opposite , which had been ours the day before and where several horsemen could be descried .
The officers said that either Napoleon or Murat was there , and they all gazed eagerly at this little group of horsemen .
Pierre also looked at them , trying to guess which of the scarcely discernible figures was Napoleon .
At last those mounted men rode away from the mound and disappeared .
Bennigsen spoke to a general who approached him , and began explaining the whole position of our troops .
Pierre listened to him , straining each faculty to understand the essential points of the impending battle , but was mortified to feel that his mental capacity was inadequate for the task .
He could make nothing of it .
Bennigsen stopped speaking and , noticing that Pierre was listening , suddenly said to him :
" I do n't think this interests you ? "
" On the contrary it 's very interesting ! " replied Pierre not quite truthfully .
From the fl`eches they rode still farther to the left , along a road winding through a thick , low - growing birch wood .
After going through the wood for about a mile and a half they came out on a glade where troops of T'uchkov 's corps were stationed to defend the left flank .
Here , at the extreme left flank , Bennigsen talked a great deal and with much heat , and , as it seemed to Pierre , gave orders of great military importance .
In front of T'uchkov 's troops was some high ground not occupied by troops .
Bennigsen loudly criticized this mistake , saying that it was madness to leave a height which commanded the country around unoccupied and to place troops below it .
Some of the generals expressed the same opinion .
One in particular declared with martial heat that they were put there to be slaughtered .
Bennigsen on his own authority ordered the troops to occupy the high ground .
This disposition on the left flank increased Pierre 's doubt of his own capacity to understand military matters .
Bennigsen did not know this and moved the troops forward according to his own ideas without mentioning the matter to the commander in chief .
CHAPTER XXIV
On that bright evening of August 25 , Prince Andrew lay leaning on his elbow in a broken - down shed in the village of Knyazk'ovo at the further end of his regiment 's encampment .
Narrow and burdensome and useless to anyone as his life now seemed to him , Prince Andrew on the eve of battle felt agitated and irritable as he had done seven years before at Austerlitz .
He had received and given the orders for next day 's battle and had nothing more to do .
But his thoughts - the simplest , clearest , and therefore most terrible thoughts - would give him no peace .
And from the height of this perception all that had previously tormented and preoccupied him suddenly became illumined by a cold white light without shadows , without perspective , without distinction of outline .
All life appeared to him like magic - lantern pictures at which he had long been gazing by artificial light through a glass .
Now he suddenly saw those badly daubed pictures in clear daylight and without a glass . "
Yes , yes !
" There they are , those rudely painted figures that once seemed splendid and mysterious .
Glory , the good of society , love of a woman , the Fatherland itself - how important these pictures appeared to me , with what profound meaning they seemed to be filled !
And it is all so simple , pale , and crude in the cold white light of this morning which I feel is dawning for me . "
The three great sorrows of his life held his attention in particular : his love for a woman , his father 's death , and the French invasion which had overrun half Russia . "
Love ... that little girl who seemed to me brimming over with mystic forces !
Yes , indeed , I loved her .
I made romantic plans of love and happiness with her !
Oh , what a boy I was ! "
he said aloud bitterly . "
Ah me !
I believed in some ideal love which was to keep her faithful to me for the whole year of my absence !
Like the gentle dove in the fable she was to pine apart from me ....
But it was much simpler really ....
It was all very simple and horrible . "
" When my father built Bald Hills he thought the place was his : his land , his air , his peasants .
But Napoleon came and swept him aside , unconscious of his existence , as he might brush a chip from his path , and his Bald Hills and his whole life fell to pieces .
Princess Mary says it is a trial sent from above .
What is the trial for , when he is not here and will never return ?
He is not here !
For whom then is the trial intended ?
The Fatherland , the destruction of Moscow !
I shall not exist .... "
He looked at the row of birches shining in the sunshine , with their motionless green and yellow foliage and white bark . "
To die ... to be killed tomorrow ...
That I should not exist ...
That all this should still be , but no me .... "
And the birches with their light and shade , the curly clouds , the smoke of the campfires , and all that was around him changed and seemed terrible and menacing .
A cold shiver ran down his spine .
He rose quickly , went out of the shed , and began to walk about .
After he had returned , voices were heard outside the shed .
"
Who 's that ? " he cried .
The red - nosed Captain Tim'okhin , formerly D'olokhov 's squadron commander , but now from lack of officers a battalion commander , shyly entered the shed followed by an adjutant and the regimental paymaster .
Prince Andrew rose hastily , listened to the business they had come about , gave them some further instructions , and was about to dismiss them when he heard a familiar , lisping , voice behind the shed .
" Devil take it ! " said the voice of a man stumbling over something .
Prince Andrew looked out of the shed and saw Pierre , who had tripped over a pole on the ground and had nearly fallen , coming his way .
It was unpleasant to Prince Andrew to meet people of his own set in general , and Pierre especially , for he reminded him of all the painful moments of his last visit to Moscow .
" You ?
What a surprise ! " said he .
" What brings you here ?
This is unexpected ! "
As he said this his eyes and face expressed more than coldness - they expressed hostility , which Pierre noticed at once .
He had approached the shed full of animation , but on seeing Prince Andrew 's face he felt constrained and ill at ease .
" I have come ... simply ... you know ... come ... it interests me , " said Pierre , who had so often that day senselessly repeated that word " interesting . "
" I wish to see the battle . "
" Oh yes , and what do the Masonic brothers say about war ?
How would they stop it ? " said Prince Andrew sarcastically . "
Well , and how 's Moscow ?
And my people ?
Have they reached Moscow at last ?
" he asked seriously .
" Yes , they have .
Julie Drubetsk'aya told me so .
I went to see them , but missed them .
They have gone to your estate near Moscow . "
CHAPTER XXV
The officers were about to take leave , but Prince Andrew , apparently reluctant to be left alone with his friend , asked them to stay and have tea .
Seats were brought in and so was the tea .
The officers gazed with surprise at Pierre 's huge stout figure and listened to his talk of Moscow and the position of our army , round which he had ridden .
Prince Andrew remained silent , and his expression was so forbidding that Pierre addressed his remarks chiefly to the good - natured battalion commander .
" So you understand the whole position of our troops ? "
Prince Andrew interrupted him .
" Yes - that is , how do you mean ? " said Pierre .
" Not being a military man I ca n't say I have understood it fully , but I understand the general position . "
" Well , then , you know more than anyone else , be it who it may , " said Prince Andrew .
" Oh ! " said Pierre , looking over his spectacles in perplexity at Prince Andrew . "
Well , and what do you think of Kut'uzov 's appointment ?
" he asked .
" I was very glad of his appointment , that 's all I know , " replied Prince Andrew .
" And tell me your opinion of Barclay de Tolly .
In Moscow they are saying heaven knows what about him ....
What do you think of him ? "
" Ask them , " replied Prince Andrew , indicating the officers .
Pierre looked at Tim'okhin with the condescendingly interrogative smile with which everybody involuntarily addressed that officer .
" We see light again , since his Serenity has been appointed , your excellency , " said Tim'okhin timidly , and continually turning to glance at his colonel .
" Why so ? " asked Pierre .
" Well , to mention only firewood and fodder , let me inform you .
Why , when we were retreating from Sventsy'ani we dare not touch a stick or a wisp of hay or anything .
You see , we were going away , so he would get it all ; was n't it so , your excellency ? " and again Tim'okhin turned to the prince . "
But we dare n't .
In our regiment two officers were court - martialed for that kind of thing .
But when his Serenity took command everything became straightforward .
Now we see light .... "
" Then why was it forbidden ? "
Tim'okhin looked about in confusion , not knowing what or how to answer such a question .
Pierre put the same question to Prince Andrew .
" Why , so as not to lay waste the country we were abandoning to the enemy , " said Prince Andrew with venomous irony .
" It is very sound : one ca n't permit the land to be pillaged and accustom the troops to marauding .
At Smol'ensk too he judged correctly that the French might outflank us , as they had larger forces .
He ordered us to retreat , and all our efforts and losses went for nothing .
He had no thought of betraying us , he tried to do the best he could , he thought out everything , and that is why he is unsuitable .
He is unsuitable now , just because he plans out everything very thoroughly and accurately as every German has to .
How can I explain ? ...
Well , say your father has a German valet , and he is a splendid valet and satisfies your father 's requirements better than you could
, then it 's all right to let him serve .
So it has been with Barclay .
While Russia was well , a foreigner could serve her and be a splendid minister ; but as soon as she is in danger she needs one of her own kin .
But in your Club they have been making him out a traitor !
He is an honest and very punctilious German . "
" And they say he 's a skillful commander , " rejoined Pierre .
" I do n't understand what is meant by ' a skillful commander , ' " replied Prince Andrew ironically .
" A skillful commander ? " replied Pierre .
"
Why , one who foresees all contingencies ... and foresees the adversary 's intentions . "
" But that 's impossible , " said Prince Andrew as if it were a matter settled long ago .
Pierre looked at him in surprise .
" And yet they say that war is like a game of chess ? " he remarked .
The relative strength of bodies of troops can never be known to anyone .
Success never depends , and never will depend , on position , or equipment , or even on numbers , and least of all on position . "
" But on what then ? "
" On the feeling that is in me and in him , " he pointed to Tim'okhin , " and in each soldier . "
Prince Andrew glanced at Tim'okhin , who looked at his commander in alarm and bewilderment .
In contrast to his former reticent taciturnity Prince Andrew now seemed excited .
He could apparently not refrain from expressing the thoughts that had suddenly occurred to him .
" A battle is won by those who firmly resolve to win it !
Why did we lose the battle at Austerlitz ?
The French losses were almost equal to ours , but very early we said to ourselves that we were losing the battle , and we did lose it .
And we said so because we had nothing to fight for there , we wanted to get away from the battlefield as soon as we could . '
We 've lost , so let us run , ' and we ran .
If we had not said that till the evening , heaven knows what might not have happened .
But tomorrow we sha n't say it !
You talk about our position , the left flank weak and the right flank too extended , " he went on .
" That 's all nonsense , there 's nothing of the kind .
But what awaits us tomorrow ?
The fact is that those men with whom you have ridden round the position not only do not help matters , but hinder .
They are only concerned with their own petty interests . "
" At such a moment ? " said Pierre reproachfully .
" At such a moment ! "
Prince Andrew repeated .
" To them it is only a moment affording opportunities to undermine a rival and obtain an extra cross or ribbon .
And if you like I will tell you that whatever happens and whatever muddles those at the top may make , we shall win tomorrow 's battle .
Tomorrow , happen what may , we shall win ! "
" There now , your excellency !
That 's the truth , the real truth , " said Tim'okhin .
" Who would spare himself now ?
The soldiers in my battalion , believe me , would n't drink their vodka ! '
It 's not the day for that ! '
they say . "
All were silent .
The officers rose .
Prince Andrew went out of the shed with them , giving final orders to the adjutant .
They rode close by continuing to converse , and Prince Andrew involuntarily heard these words :
" Der Krieg muss in Raum verlegt werden .
Der Ansicht kann ich nicht genug Preis geben , " * said one of them .
* " The war must be extended widely .
I can not sufficiently commend that view . "
" Oh , ja , " said the other , " der Zweck ist nur den Feind zu schw"achen , so kann man gewiss nicht den Verlust der Privat - Personen in Achtung nehmen . "
*
* " Oh , yes , the only aim is to weaken the enemy , so of course one can not take into account the loss of private individuals . "
" Oh , no , " agreed the other .
" Extend widely ! " said Prince Andrew with an angry snort , when they had ridden past .
" In that ' extend ' were my father , son , and sister , at Bald Hills .
That 's all the same to him !
They have yielded up all Europe to him , and have now come to teach us .
Fine teachers ! "
and again his voice grew shrill .
" So you think we shall win tomorrow 's battle ? " asked Pierre .
" Yes , yes , " answered Prince Andrew absently .
" One thing I would do if I had the power , " he began again , " I would not take prisoners .
Why take prisoners ?
It 's chivalry !
The French have destroyed my home and are on their way to destroy Moscow , they have outraged and are outraging me every moment .
They are my enemies .
In my opinion they are all criminals .
And so thinks Tim'okhin and the whole army .
They should be executed !
Since they are my foes they can not be my friends , whatever may have been said at Tilsit . "
" Yes , yes , " muttered Pierre , looking with shining eyes at Prince Andrew .
" I quite agree with you ! "
The question that had perturbed Pierre on the Mozh'aysk hill and all that day now seemed to him quite clear and completely solved .
He now understood the whole meaning and importance of this war and of the impending battle .
All he had seen that day , all the significant and stern expressions on the faces he had seen in passing , were lit up for him by a new light .
" Not take prisoners , " Prince Andrew continued : " That by itself would quite change the whole war and make it less cruel .
As it is we have played at war -
that 's what 's vile !
We play at magnanimity and all that stuff .
They talk to us of the rules of war , of chivalry , of flags of truce , of mercy to the unfortunate and so on .
It 's all rubbish !
I saw chivalry and flags of truce in 1805 ; they humbugged us and we humbugged them .
They plunder other people 's houses , issue false paper money , and worst of all they kill my children and my father , and then talk of rules of war and magnanimity to foes !
Take no prisoners , but kill and be killed !
He who has come to this as I have through the same sufferings ... "
Prince Andrew , who had thought it was all the same to him whether or not Moscow was taken as Smol'ensk had been , was suddenly checked in his speech by an unexpected cramp in his throat .
He paced up and down a few times in silence , but his eyes glittered feverishly and his lips quivered as he began speaking .
" If there was none of this magnanimity in war , we should go to war only when it was worth while going to certain death , as now .
Then there would not be war because Paul Iv'anovich had offended Michael Iv'anovich .
And when there was a war , like this one , it would be war !
And then the determination of the troops would be quite different .
Then all these Westphalians and Hessians whom Napoleon is leading would not follow him into Russia , and we should not go to fight in Austria and Prussia without knowing why .
War is not courtesy but the most horrible thing in life ; and we ought to understand that and not play at war .
We ought to accept this terrible necessity sternly and seriously .
It all lies in that : get rid of falsehood and let war be war and not a game .
As it is now , war is the favorite pastime of the idle and frivolous .
The military calling is the most highly honored .
" But what is war ?
What is needed for success in warfare ?
What are the habits of the military ?
The habits of the military class are the absence of freedom , that is , discipline , idleness , ignorance , cruelty , debauchery , and drunkenness .
And in spite of all this it is the highest class , respected by everyone .
All the kings , except the Chinese , wear military uniforms , and he who kills most people receives the highest rewards .
How does God above look at them and hear them ? "
exclaimed Prince Andrew in a shrill , piercing voice .
"
Ah , my friend , it has of late become hard for me to live .
I see that I have begun to understand too much .
And it does n't do for man to taste of the tree of knowledge of good and evil ....
Ah , well , it 's not for long ! "
he added .
" However , you 're sleepy , and it 's time for me to sleep .
Go back to G'orki ! " said Prince Andrew suddenly .
" Oh no ! "
Pierre replied , looking at Prince Andrew with frightened , compassionate eyes .
" Go , go !
Before a battle one must have one 's sleep out , " repeated Prince Andrew .
He came quickly up to Pierre and embraced and kissed him . "
Good - by , be off ! "
he shouted .
" Whether we meet again or not ... " and turning away hurriedly he entered the shed .
It was already dark , and Pierre could not make out whether the expression of Prince Andrew 's face was angry or tender .
For some time he stood in silence considering whether he should follow him or go away . "
No , he does not want it ! "
Pierre concluded . "
And I know that this is our last meeting ! "
He sighed deeply and rode back to G'orki .
On re - entering the shed Prince Andrew lay down on a rug , but he could not sleep .
He closed his eyes .
One picture succeeded another in his imagination .
On one of them he dwelt long and joyfully .
He vividly recalled an evening in Petersburg .
Nat'asha with animated and excited face was telling him how she had gone to look for mushrooms the previous summer and had lost her way in the big forest .
She incoherently described the depths of the forest , her feelings , and a talk with a beekeeper she met , and constantly interrupted her story to say : " No , I ca n't !
I 'm not telling it right ; no , you do n't understand , " though he encouraged her by saying that he did understand , and he really had understood all she wanted to say .
But Nat'asha was not satisfied with her own words : she felt that they did not convey the passionately poetic feeling she had experienced that day and wished to convey . "
He was such a delightful old man , and it was so dark in the forest ... and he had such kind ...
No , I ca n't describe it , " she had said , flushed and excited .
Prince Andrew smiled now the same happy smile as then when he had looked into her eyes .
" I understood her , " he thought .
I loved in her ...
loved so strongly and happily ... " and suddenly he remembered how his love had ended . "
He did not need anything of that kind .
He neither saw nor understood anything of the sort .
He only saw in her a pretty and fresh young girl , with whom he did not deign to unite his fate .
And I ? ...
and he is still alive and gay ! "
Prince Andrew jumped up as if someone had burned him , and again began pacing up and down in front of the shed .
CHAPTER XXVI
Fabvier , not entering the tent , remained at the entrance talking to some generals of his acquaintance .
The Emperor Napoleon had not yet left his bedroom and was finishing his toilet .
Slightly snorting and grunting , he presented now his back and now his plump hairy chest to the brush with which his valet was rubbing him down .
Napoleon 's short hair was wet and matted on the forehead , but his face , though puffy and yellow , expressed physical satisfaction . "
Go on , harder , go on ! "
he muttered to the valet who was rubbing him , slightly twitching and grunting .
Napoleon , frowning , looked at him from under his brows .
" No prisoners ! " said he , repeating the aide - de - camp 's words . "
They are forcing us to exterminate them .
So much the worse for the Russian army ....
Go on ... harder , harder ! "
he muttered , hunching his back and presenting his fat shoulders .
" All right .
Let Monsieur de Beausset enter , and Fabvier too , " he said , nodding to the aide - de - camp .
" Yes , sire , " and the aide - de - camp disappeared through the door of the tent .
Two valets rapidly dressed His Majesty , and wearing the blue uniform of the Guards he went with firm quick steps to the reception room .
De Beausset 's hands meanwhile were busily engaged arranging the present he had brought from the Empress , on two chairs directly in front of the entrance .
But Napoleon had dressed and come out with such unexpected rapidity that he had not time to finish arranging the surprise .
Napoleon noticed at once what they were about and guessed that they were not ready .
The result of that battle had been deplorable .
Napoleon made ironic remarks during Fabvier 's account , as if he had not expected that matters could go otherwise in his absence .
" I must make up for that in Moscow , " said Napoleon .
" I 'll see you later , " he added , and summoned de Beausset , who by that time had prepared the surprise , having placed something on the chairs and covered it with a cloth .
De Beausset bowed low , with that courtly French bow which only the old retainers of the Bourbons knew how to make , and approached him , presenting an envelope .
Napoleon turned to him gaily and pulled his ear .
" You have hurried here .
I am very glad .
Well , what is Paris saying ?
" he asked , suddenly changing his former stern expression for a most cordial tone .
" Sire , all Paris regrets your absence , " replied de Beausset as was proper .
But though Napoleon knew that de Beausset had to say something of this kind , and though in his lucid moments he knew it was untrue , he was pleased to hear it from him .
Again he honored him by touching his ear .
" I am very sorry to have made you travel so far , " said he .
" Sire , I expected nothing less than to find you at the gates of Moscow , " replied de Beausset .
Napoleon smiled and , lifting his head absent - mindedly , glanced to the right .
An aide - de - camp approached with gliding steps and offered him a gold snuffbox , which he took .
" Yes , it has happened luckily for you , " he said , raising the open snuffbox to his nose .
" You are fond of travel , and in three days you will see Moscow .
You surely did not expect to see that Asiatic capital .
You will have a pleasant journey . "
De Beausset bowed gratefully at this regard for his taste for travel ( of which he had not till then been aware ) .
" Ha , what 's this ? "
asked Napoleon , noticing that all the courtiers were looking at something concealed under a cloth .
With courtly adroitness de Beausset half turned and without turning his back to the Emperor retired two steps , twitching off the cloth at the same time , and said :
" A present to Your Majesty from the Empress . "
A very pretty curly - headed boy with a look of the Christ in the Sistine Madonna was depicted playing at stick and ball .
The ball represented the terrestrial globe and the stick in his other hand a scepter .
" The King of Rome ! "
he said , pointing to the portrait with a graceful gesture . "
Admirable ! "
With the natural capacity of an Italian for changing the expression of his face at will , he drew nearer to the portrait and assumed a look of pensive tenderness .
His eyes grew dim , he moved forward , glanced round at a chair ( which seemed to place itself under him ) , and sat down on it before the portrait .
At a single gesture from him everyone went out on tiptoe , leaving the great man to himself and his emotion .
Having sat still for a while he touched - himself not knowing why - the thick spot of paint representing the highest light in the portrait , rose , and recalled de Beausset and the officer on duty .
" Vive l'Empereur !
Vive le roi de Rome !
Vive l'Empereur ! " came those ecstatic cries .
After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset 's presence dictated his order of the day to the army .
" Short and energetic ! "
he remarked when he had read over the proclamation which he had dictated straight off without corrections .
It ran :
Soldiers !
This is the battle you have so longed for .
Victory depends on you .
It is essential for us ; it will give us all we need : comfortable quarters and a speedy return to our country .
Behave as you did at Austerlitz , Friedland , V'itebsk , and Smol'ensk .
Let our remotest posterity recall your achievements this day with pride .
Let it be said of each of you : " He was in the great battle before Moscow ! "
" Your Majesty is too kind ! " replied de Beausset to the invitation to accompany the Emperor ; he wanted to sleep , did not know how to ride and was afraid of doing so .
But Napoleon nodded to the traveler , and de Beausset had to mount .
When Napoleon came out of the tent the shouting of the Guards before his son 's portrait grew still louder .
Napoleon frowned .
" Take him away ! "
he said , pointing with a gracefully majestic gesture to the portrait .
" It is too soon for him to see a field of battle . "
De Beausset closed his eyes , bowed his head , and sighed deeply , to indicate how profoundly he valued and comprehended the Emperor 's words .
CHAPTER XXVII
That part of the line was not entrenched and in front of it the ground was more open and level than elsewhere .
It was evident to anyone , military or not , that it was here the French should attack .
Having listened to a suggestion from Davout , who was now called Prince d'Eckm"uhl , to turn the Russian left wing , Napoleon said it should not be done , without explaining why not .
After giving these and other commands he returned to his tent , and the dispositions for the battle were written down from his dictation .
These dispositions , of which the French historians write with enthusiasm and other historians with profound respect , were as follows :
At dawn the two new batteries established during the night on the plain occupied by the Prince d'Eckm"uhl will open fire on the opposing batteries of the enemy .
24 guns of the artillery of the Guards 30 guns of Campan 's division
and      8 guns of Friant 's and Dessaix 's divisions -
in all 62 guns .
General Sorbier must be ready at the first order to advance with all the howitzers of the Guard 's artillery against either one or other of the entrenchments .
During the cannonade Prince Poniatowski is to advance through the wood on the village and turn the enemy 's position .
General Campan will move through the wood to seize the first fortification .
After the advance has begun in this manner , orders will be given in accordance with the enemy 's movements .
The cannonade on the left flank will begin as soon as the guns of the right wing are heard .
The sharpshooters of Morand 's division and of the vice - King 's division will open a heavy fire on seeing the attack commence on the right wing .
All this must be done in good order ( le tout se fera avec ordre et m'ethode ) as far as possible retaining troops in reserve .
The Imperial Camp near Mozh'aysk ,
September , 6 , 1812 .
These dispositions , which are very obscure and confused if one allows oneself to regard the arrangements without religious awe of his genius , related to Napoleon 's orders to deal with four points - four different orders .
Not one of these was , or could be , carried out .
The second order was that Poniatowski , moving to the village through the wood , should turn the Russian left flank .
This could not be done and was not done , because Poniatowski , advancing on the village through the wood , met T'uchkov there barring his way , and could not and did not turn the Russian position .
The third order was : General Campan will move through the wood to seize the first fortification .
General Campan 's division did not seize the first fortification but was driven back , for on emerging from the wood it had to reform under grapeshot , of which Napoleon was unaware .
All this , like the other parts of the disposition , was not and could not be executed .
So not one of the orders in the disposition was , or could be , executed .
CHAPTER XXVIII
At the battle of Borodin'o Napoleon shot at no one and killed no one .
That was all done by the soldiers .
Therefore it was not he who killed people .
The French soldiers went to kill and be killed at the battle of Borodin'o not because of Napoleon 's orders but by their own volition .
Had Napoleon then forbidden them to fight the Russians , they would have killed him and have proceeded to fight the Russians because it was inevitable .
There was nothing left for them to do but cry " Vive l'Empereur ! " and go to fight , in order to get food and rest as conquerors in Moscow .
So it was not because of Napoleon 's commands that they killed their fellow men .
And it was not Napoleon who directed the course of the battle , for none of his orders were executed and during the battle he did not know what was going on before him .
It only seemed to Napoleon that it all took place by his will .
And so the question whether he had or had not a cold has no more historic interest than the cold of the least of the transport soldiers .
The dispositions cited above are not at all worse , but are even better , than previous dispositions by which he had won victories .
His pseudo - orders during the battle were also no worse than formerly , but much the same as usual .
These dispositions and orders only seem worse than previous ones because the battle of Borodin'o was the first Napoleon did not win .
The dispositions drawn up by Weyrother for the battle of Austerlitz were a model of perfection for that kind of composition , but still they were criticized - criticized for their very perfection , for their excessive minuteness .
Napoleon at the battle of Borodin'o fulfilled his office as representative of authority as well as , and even better than , at other battles .
CHAPTER XXIX
On returning from a second inspection of the lines , Napoleon remarked :
" The chessmen are set up , the game will begin tomorrow ! "
The matter is in my hands and is clear and definite in my head .
When the time comes to set to work
Having finished his second glass of punch , Napoleon went to rest before the serious business which , he considered , awaited him next day .
He asked whether the Russians had not withdrawn , and was told that the enemy 's fires were still in the same places .
He nodded approval .
The adjutant in attendance came into the tent .
" Well , Rapp , do you think we shall do good business today ? "
Napoleon asked him .
" Without doubt , sire , " replied Rapp .
Napoleon looked at him .
" Do you remember , sire , what you did me the honor to say at Smol'ensk ? " continued Rapp . "
The wine is drawn and must be drunk . "
Napoleon frowned and sat silent for a long time leaning his head on his hand .
" This poor army ! " he suddenly remarked . " It has diminished greatly since Smol'ensk .
Fortune is frankly a courtesan , Rapp .
I have always said so and I am beginning to experience it .
But the Guards , Rapp , the Guards are intact ?
" he remarked interrogatively .
" Yes , sire , " replied Rapp .
Napoleon took a lozenge , put it in his mouth , and glanced at his watch .
He was not sleepy and it was still not nearly morning .
It was impossible to give further orders for the sake of killing time , for the orders had all been given and were now being executed .
" Have the biscuits and rice been served out to the regiments of the Guards ? " asked Napoleon sternly .
" Yes , sire . "
" The rice too ? "
Rapp replied that he had given the Emperor 's order about the rice , but Napoleon shook his head in dissatisfaction as if not believing that his order had been executed .
An attendant came in with punch .
Napoleon ordered another glass to be brought for Rapp , and silently sipped his own .
" I have neither taste nor smell , " he remarked , sniffing at his glass . "
This cold is tiresome .
They talk about medicine - what is the good of medicine when it ca n't cure a cold !
Corvisart gave me these lozenges but they do n't help at all .
What can doctors cure ?
One ca n't cure anything .
Our body is a machine for living .
It is organized for that , it is its nature .
Let life go on in it unhindered and let it defend itself , it will do more than if you paralyze it by encumbering it with remedies .
Our body is like a perfect watch that should go for a certain time ; the watchmaker can not open it , he can only adjust it by fumbling , and that blindfold ....
Yes , our body is just a machine for living , that is all . "
And having entered on the path of definition , of which he was fond , Napoleon suddenly and unexpectedly gave a new one .
" Do you know , Rapp , what military art is ? " asked he .
" It is the art of being stronger than the enemy at a given moment .
That 's all . "
Rapp made no reply .
" Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Kut'uzov ! " said Napoleon .
" We shall see !
Do you remember at Braunau he commanded an army for three weeks and did not once mount a horse to inspect his entrenchments ....
We shall see ! "
He looked at his watch .
It was still only four o'clock .
He did not feel sleepy .
The punch was finished and there was still nothing to do .
He rose , walked to and fro , put on a warm overcoat and a hat , and went out of the tent .
The night was dark and damp , a scarcely perceptible moisture was descending from above .
Near by , the campfires were dimly burning among the French Guards , and in the distance those of the Russian line shone through the smoke .
The weather was calm , and the rustle and tramp of the French troops already beginning to move to take up their positions were clearly audible .
" What year did you enter the service ?
" he asked with that affectation of military bluntness and geniality with which he always addressed the soldiers .
The man answered the question .
" Ah !
One of the old ones !
Has your regiment had its rice ? "
" It has , Your Majesty . "
Napoleon nodded and walked away .
At half - past five Napoleon rode to the village of Shev'ardino .
It was growing light , the sky was clearing , only a single cloud lay in the east .
The abandoned campfires were burning themselves out in the faint morning light .
On the right a single deep report of a cannon resounded and died away in the prevailing silence .
Some minutes passed .
A second and a third report shook the air , then a fourth and a fifth boomed solemnly near by on the right .
The first shots had not yet ceased to reverberate before others rang out and yet more were heard mingling with and overtaking one another .
Napoleon with his suite rode up to the Shev'ardino Redoubt where he dismounted .
The game had begun .
CHAPTER XXX
Before he was thoroughly awake next morning everybody had already left the hut .
The panes were rattling in the little windows and his groom was shaking him .
" Your excellency !
Your excellency !
Your excellency !
" he kept repeating pertinaciously while he shook Pierre by the shoulder without looking at him , having apparently lost hope of getting him to wake up .
" What ?
Has it begun ?
Is it time ? "
Pierre asked , waking up .
" Hear the firing , " said the groom , a discharged soldier .
" All the gentlemen have gone out , and his Serene Highness himself rode past long ago . "
Pierre dressed hastily and ran out to the porch .
Outside all was bright , fresh , dewy , and cheerful .
The roar of guns sounded more distinct outside .
An adjutant accompanied by a Cossack passed by at a sharp trot .
" It 's time , Count ; it 's time ! "
cried the adjutant .
Telling the groom to follow him with the horses , Pierre went down the street to the knoll from which he had looked at the field of battle the day before .
He was looking through a field glass down the highroad before him .
Mounting the steps to the knoll Pierre looked at the scene before him , spellbound by beauty .
Nearer at hand glittered golden cornfields interspersed with copses .
There were troops to be seen everywhere , in front and to the right and left .
All this was vivid , majestic , and unexpected ; but what impressed Pierre most of all was the view of the battlefield itself , of Borodin'o and the hollows on both sides of the Koloch'a .
A white church could be seen through the mist , and here and there the roofs of huts in Borodin'o as well as dense masses of soldiers , or green ammunition chests and ordnance .
And all this moved , or seemed to move , as the smoke and mist spread out over the whole space .
These puffs of smoke and ( strange to say ) the sound of the firing produced the chief beauty of the spectacle .
" Puff!"-suddenly a round compact cloud of smoke was seen merging from violet into gray and milky white , and " boom ! " came the report a second later .
" Puff !
puff!"-and two clouds arose pushing one another and blending together ; and " boom , boom ! " came the sounds confirming what the eye had seen .
three and then four more appeared and then from each , with the same interval-"boom - boom , boom ! " came the fine , firm , precise sounds in reply .
It seemed as if those smoke clouds sometimes ran and sometimes stood still while woods , fields , and glittering bayonets ran past them .
Trakh - ta - ta - takh ! " came the frequent crackle of musketry , but it was irregular and feeble in comparison with the reports of the cannon .
Pierre wished to be there with that smoke , those shining bayonets , that movement , and those sounds .
He turned to look at Kut'uzov and his suite , to compare his impressions with those of others .
They were all looking at the field of battle as he was , and , as it seemed to him , with the same feelings .
All their faces were now shining with that latent warmth of feeling Pierre had noticed the day before and had fully understood after his talk with Prince Andrew .
" Go , my dear fellow , go ... and Christ be with you ! "
Kut'uzov was saying to a general who stood beside him , not taking his eye from the battlefield .
Having received this order the general passed by Pierre on his way down the knoll .
" To the crossing ! " said the general coldly and sternly in reply to one of the staff who asked where he was going .
" I 'll go there too , I too ! " thought Pierre , and followed the general .
The general mounted a horse a Cossack had brought him .
CHAPTER XXXI
Having descended the hill the general after whom Pierre was galloping turned sharply to the left , and Pierre , losing sight of him , galloped in among some ranks of infantry marching ahead of him .
He tried to pass either in front of them or to the right or left , but there were soldiers everywhere , all with the same preoccupied expression and busy with some unseen but evidently important task .
They all gazed with the same dissatisfied and inquiring expression at this stout man in a white hat , who for some unknown reason threatened to trample them under his horse 's hoofs .
" Why ride into the middle of the battalion ? " one of them shouted at him .
Another prodded his horse with the butt end of a musket , and Pierre , bending over his saddlebow and hardly able to control his shying horse , galloped ahead of the soldiers where there was a free space .
There was a bridge ahead of him , where other soldiers stood firing .
Pierre rode up to them .
Without being aware of it he had come to the bridge across the Koloch'a between G'orki and Borodin'o , which the French ( having occupied Borodin'o ) were attacking in the first phase of the battle .
He looked about him with a smile which did not leave his face .
" Why 's that fellow in front of the line ? " shouted somebody at him again .
" To the left ! ...
Keep to the right ! "
the men shouted to him .
Pierre went to the right , and unexpectedly encountered one of Ra'evski 's adjutants whom he knew .
The adjutant looked angrily at him , evidently also intending to shout at him , but on recognizing him he nodded .
" How have you got here ? "
he said , and galloped on .
Pierre , feeling out of place there , having nothing to do , and afraid of getting in someone 's way again , galloped after the adjutant .
" What 's happening here ?
May I come with you ? " he asked .
" One moment , one moment ! " replied the adjutant , and riding up to a stout colonel who was standing in the meadow , he gave him some message and then addressed Pierre .
" Why have you come here , Count ? " he asked with a smile . "
Still inquisitive ? "
" Yes , yes , " assented Pierre .
But the adjutant turned his horse about and rode on .
" Here it 's tolerable , " said he , " but with Bagrati'on on the left flank they 're getting it frightfully hot . "
" Really ? " said Pierre .
" Where is that ? "
" Come along with me to our knoll .
We can get a view from there and in our battery it is still bearable , " said the adjutant .
" Will you come ? "
" Yes , I 'll come with you , " replied Pierre , looking round for his groom .
It was only now that he noticed wounded men staggering along or being carried on stretchers .
On that very meadow he had ridden over the day before , a soldier was lying athwart the rows of scented hay , with his head thrown awkwardly back and his shako off .
" Why have n't they carried him away ? "
Pierre was about to ask , but seeing the stern expression of the adjutant who was also looking that way , he checked himself .
Pierre did not find his groom and rode along the hollow with the adjutant to Ra'evski 's Redoubt .
His horse lagged behind the adjutant 's and jolted him at every step .
" You do n't seem to be used to riding , Count ? " remarked the adjutant .
" No it 's not that , but her action seems so jerky , " said Pierre in a puzzled tone .
" Why ... she 's wounded ! " said the adjutant .
" In the off foreleg above the knee .
A bullet , no doubt .
I congratulate you , Count , on your baptism of fire ! "
Having ridden in the smoke past the Sixth Corps , behind the artillery which had been moved forward and was in action , deafening them with the noise of firing , they came to a small wood .
There it was cool and quiet , with a scent of autumn .
Pierre and the adjutant dismounted and walked up the hill on foot .
" Is the general here ? " asked the adjutant on reaching the knoll .
" He was here a minute ago but has just gone that way , " someone told him , pointing to the right .
The adjutant looked at Pierre as if puzzled what to do with him now .
" Do n't trouble about me , " said Pierre .
" I 'll go up onto the knoll if I may ? "
" Yes , do .
You 'll see everything from there
and it 's less dangerous , and I 'll come for you . "
Pierre went to the battery and the adjutant rode on .
They did not meet again , and only much later did Pierre learn that he lost an arm that day .
This redoubt consisted of a knoll , on three sides of which trenches had been dug .
Within the entrenchment stood ten guns that were being fired through openings in the earthwork .
In line with the knoll on both sides stood other guns which also fired incessantly .
A little behind the guns stood infantry .
When ascending that knoll Pierre had no notion that this spot , on which small trenches had been dug and from which a few guns were firing , was the most important point of the battle .
On the contrary , just because he happened to be there he thought it one of the least significant parts of the field .
Having reached the knoll , Pierre sat down at one end of a trench surrounding the battery and gazed at what was going on around him with an unconsciously happy smile .
Occasionally he rose and walked about the battery still with that same smile , trying not to obstruct the soldiers who were loading , hauling the guns , and continually running past him with bags and charges .
The guns of that battery were being fired continually one after another with a deafening roar , enveloping the whole neighborhood in powder smoke .
The intrusion of Pierre 's nonmilitary figure in a white hat made an unpleasant impression at first .
The soldiers looked askance at him with surprise and even alarm as they went past him .
The senior artillery officer , a tall , long - legged , pockmarked man , moved over to Pierre as if to see the action of the farthest gun and looked at him with curiosity .
A young round - faced officer , quite a boy still and evidently only just out of the Cadet College , who was zealously commanding the two guns entrusted to him , addressed Pierre sternly .
" Sir , " he said , " permit me to ask you to stand aside .
You must not be here . "
The soldiers shook their heads disapprovingly as they looked at Pierre .
The men soon accepted Pierre into their family , adopted him , gave him a nickname ( " our gentleman " ) , and made kindly fun of him among themselves .
A shell tore up the earth two paces from Pierre and he looked around with a smile as he brushed from his clothes some earth it had thrown up .
" Are you afraid , then ? " said Pierre .
" What else do you expect ? " answered the soldier .
" She has no mercy , you know !
When she comes spluttering down , out go your innards .
One ca n't help being afraid , " he said laughing .
Several of the men , with bright kindly faces , stopped beside Pierre .
They seemed not to have expected him to talk like anybody else , and the discovery that he did so delighted them .
" It 's the business of us soldiers .
But in a gentleman it 's wonderful !
There 's a gentleman for you ! "
" To your places ! " cried the young officer to the men gathered round Pierre .
The young officer was evidently exercising his duties for the first or second time and therefore treated both his superiors and the men with great precision and formality .
Moreover , his whole attention was engrossed by watching the family circle - separated from all else - formed by the men in the battery .
His first unconscious feeling of joyful animation produced by the sights and sounds of the battlefield was now replaced by another , especially since he had seen that soldier lying alone in the hayfield .
Now , seated on the slope of the trench , he observed the faces of those around him .
By ten o'clock some twenty men had already been carried away from the battery ; two guns were smashed and cannon balls fell more and more frequently on the battery and spent bullets buzzed and whistled around .
But the men in the battery seemed not to notice this , and merry voices and jokes were heard on all sides .
" A live one ! " shouted a man as a whistling shell approached .
" Not this way !
To the infantry ! " added another with loud laughter , seeing the shell fly past and fall into the ranks of the supports .
" Are you bowing to a friend , eh ? " remarked another , chaffing a peasant who ducked low as a cannon ball flew over .
Several soldiers gathered by the wall of the trench , looking out to see what was happening in front .
" They 've withdrawn the front line , it has retired , " said they , pointing over the earthwork .
" Mind your own business , " an old sergeant shouted at them .
" If they 've retired it 's because there 's work for them to do farther back . "
And the sergeant , taking one of the men by the shoulders , gave him a shove with his knee .
This was followed by a burst of laughter .
" To the fifth gun , wheel it up ! " came shouts from one side .
" Now then , all together , like bargees ! " rose the merry voices of those who were moving the gun .
" Oh , she nearly knocked our gentleman 's hat off ! " cried the red - faced humorist , showing his teeth chaffing Pierre . "
Awkward baggage ! "
he added reproachfully to a cannon ball that struck a cannon wheel and a man 's leg .
" Now then , you foxes ! "
said another , laughing at some militiamen who , stooping low , entered the battery to carry away the wounded man .
" So this gruel is n't to your taste ?
Oh , you crows !
You 're scared ! "
they shouted at the militiamen who stood hesitating before the man whose leg had been torn off .
" There , lads ...
oh ,
oh ! "
they mimicked the peasants , " they do n't like it at all ! "
Pierre noticed that after every ball that hit the redoubt , and after every loss , the liveliness increased more and more .
At ten o'clock the infantry that had been among the bushes in front of the battery and along the K'amenka streamlet retreated .
From the battery they could be seen running back past it carrying their wounded on their muskets .
After this from amid the ranks of infantry to the right of the battery came the sound of a drum and shouts of command , and from the battery one saw how those ranks of infantry moved forward .
Pierre looked over the wall of the trench and was particularly struck by a pale young officer who , letting his sword hang down , was walking backwards and kept glancing uneasily around .
The ranks of the infantry disappeared amid the smoke but their long - drawn shout and rapid musketry firing could still be heard .
A few minutes later crowds of wounded men and stretcher - bearers came back from that direction .
Projectiles began to fall still more frequently in the battery .
Several men were lying about who had not been removed .
Around the cannon the men moved still more briskly and busily .
No one any longer took notice of Pierre .
Once or twice he was shouted at for being in the way .
The senior officer moved with big , rapid strides from one gun to another with a frowning face .
The young officer , with his face still more flushed , commanded the men more scrupulously than ever .
The soldiers handed up the charges , turned , loaded , and did their business with strained smartness .
They gave little jumps as they walked , as though they were on springs .
The stormcloud had come upon them , and in every face the fire which Pierre had watched kindle burned up brightly .
Pierre standing beside the commanding officer .
The young officer , his hand to his shako , ran up to his superior .
" I have the honor to report , sir , that only eight rounds are left .
Are we to continue firing ? " he asked .
" Grapeshot ! "
the senior shouted , without answering the question , looking over the wall of the trench .
Suddenly something happened : the young officer gave a gasp and bending double sat down on the ground like a bird shot on the wing .
Everything became strange , confused , and misty in Pierre 's eyes .
One cannon ball after another whistled by and struck the earthwork , a soldier , or a gun .
Pierre , who had not noticed these sounds before , now heard nothing else .
On the right of the battery soldiers shouting " Hurrah ! " were running not forwards but backwards , it seemed to Pierre .
A cannon ball struck the very end of the earth work by which he was standing , crumbling down the earth ; a black ball flashed before his eyes and at the same instant plumped into something .
Some militiamen who were entering the battery ran back .
" All with grapeshot ! " shouted the officer .
" The scoundrels !
What are they doing ? " shouted the officer , turning to Pierre .
The officer 's face was red and perspiring and his eyes glittered under his frowning brow .
" Run to the reserves and bring up the ammunition boxes ! " he yelled , angrily avoiding Pierre with his eyes and speaking to his men .
" I 'll go , " said Pierre .
The officer , without answering him , strode across to the opposite side .
" Do n't fire ....
Wait ! " he shouted .
The man who had been ordered to go for ammunition stumbled against Pierre .
" Eh , sir , this is no place for you , " said he , and ran down the slope .
Pierre ran after him , avoiding the spot where the young officer was sitting .
One cannon ball , another , and a third flew over him , falling in front , beside , and behind him .
Pierre ran down the slope .
" Where am I going ? "
he suddenly asked himself when he was already near the green ammunition wagons .
He halted irresolutely , not knowing whether to return or go on .
Suddenly a terrible concussion threw him backwards to the ground .
At the same instant he was dazzled by a great flash of flame , and immediately a deafening roar , crackling , and whistling made his ears tingle .
CHAPTER XXXII
Beside himself with terror Pierre jumped up and ran back to the battery , as to the only refuge from the horrors that surrounded him .
On entering the earthwork he noticed that there were men doing something there but that no shots were being fired from the battery .
He had no time to realize who these men were .
He also saw something else that was strange .
The officer , dropping his sword , seized Pierre by his collar .
For some seconds they gazed with frightened eyes at one another 's unfamiliar faces and both were perplexed at what they had done and what they were to do next . "
Am
I taken prisoner or have I taken him prisoner ? "
each was thinking .
But the French officer was evidently more inclined to think he had been taken prisoner because Pierre 's strong hand , impelled by instinctive fear , squeezed his throat ever tighter and tighter .
Pierre too bent his head and let his hands fall .
But before he reached the foot of the knoll he was met by a dense crowd of Russian soldiers who , stumbling , tripping up , and shouting , ran merrily and wildly toward the battery .
The French who had occupied the battery fled , and our troops shouting " Hurrah ! "
pursued them so far beyond the battery that it was difficult to call them back .
The prisoners were brought down from the battery and among them was a wounded French general , whom the officers surrounded .
Crowds of wounded - some known to Pierre and some unknown - Russians and French , with faces distorted by suffering , walked , crawled , and were carried on stretchers from the battery .
Pierre again went up onto the knoll where he had spent over an hour , and of that family circle which had received him as a member he did not find a single one .
There were many dead whom he did not know , but some he recognized .
The young officer still sat in the same way , bent double , in a pool of blood at the edge of the earth wall .
The red - faced man was still twitching , but they did not carry him away .
Pierre ran down the slope once more .
" Now they will stop it , now they will be horrified at what they have done ! " he thought , aimlessly going toward a crowd of stretcher bearers moving from the battlefield .
CHAPTER XXXIII
The chief action of the battle of Borodin'o was fought within the seven thousand feet between Borodin'o and Bagrati'on 's fl`eches .
On the field between Borodin'o and the fl`eches , beside the wood , the chief action of the day took place on an open space visible from both sides and was fought in the simplest and most artless way .
The battle began on both sides with a cannonade from several hundred guns .
Then when the whole field was covered with smoke , two divisions , Campan 's and Dessaix 's , advanced from the French right , while Murat 's troops advanced on Borodin'o from their left .
The soldiers of Dessaix 's division advancing against the fl`eches could only be seen till they had entered the hollow that lay between them and the fl`eches .
As soon as they had descended into that hollow , the smoke of the guns and musketry on the fl`eches grew so dense that it covered the whole approach on that side of it .
Through the smoke glimpses could be caught of something black - probably men - and at times the glint of bayonets .
But whether they were moving or stationary , whether they were French or Russian , could not be discovered from the Shev'ardino Redoubt .
The sun had risen brightly and its slanting rays struck straight into Napoleon 's face as , shading his eyes with his hand , he looked at the fl`eches .
The smoke spread out before them , and at times it looked as if the smoke were moving , at times as if the troops moved .
Sometimes shouts were heard through the firing , but it was impossible to tell what was being done there .
He descended the knoll and began walking up and down before it .
Occasionally he stopped , listened to the firing , and gazed intently at the battlefield .
Thus an adjutant galloped up from Murat with tidings that Borodin'o had been occupied and the bridge over the Koloch'a was in the hands of the French .
The adjutant asked whether Napoleon wished the troops to cross it ?
Napoleon gave orders that the troops should form up on the farther side and wait .
On the basis of these necessarily untrustworthy reports Napoleon gave his orders , which had either been executed before he gave them or could not be and were not executed .
But even their orders , like Napoleon 's , were seldom carried out , and then but partially .
For the most part things happened contrary to their orders .
In this way two cavalry regiments galloped through the Sem"enovsk hollow and as soon as they reached the top of the incline turned round and galloped full speed back again .
The infantry moved in the same way , sometimes running to quite other places than those they were ordered to go to .
In reality , however , all these movements forward and backward did not improve or alter the position of the troops .
All their rushing and galloping at one another did little harm , the harm of disablement and death was caused by the balls and bullets that flew over the fields on which these men were floundering about .
CHAPTER XXXIV
Napoleon 's generals - Davout , Ney , and Murat , who were near that region of fire and sometimes even entered it - repeatedly led into it huge masses of well - ordered troops .
But contrary to what had always happened in their former battles , instead of the news they expected of the enemy 's flight , these orderly masses returned thence as disorganized and terrified mobs .
The generals re - formed them , but their numbers constantly decreased .
In the middle of the day Murat sent his adjutant to Napoleon to demand reinforcements .
Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll , drinking punch , when Murat 's adjutant galloped up with an assurance that the Russians would be routed if His Majesty would let him have another division .
" Reinforcements ? " said Napoleon in a tone of stern surprise , looking at the adjutant - a handsome lad with long black curls arranged like Murat 's own - as though he did not understand his words .
" Reinforcements ! " thought Napoleon to himself .
" How can they need reinforcements when they already have half the army directed against a weak , unentrenched Russian wing ? "
" Tell the King of Naples , " said he sternly , " that it is not noon yet , and I do n't yet see my chessboard clearly .
Go ! ... "
The handsome boy adjutant with the long hair sighed deeply without removing his hand from his hat and galloped back to where men were being slaughtered .
Napoleon rose and having summoned Caulaincourt and Berthier began talking to them about matters unconnected with the battle .
In the midst of this conversation , which was beginning to interest Napoleon , Berthier 's eyes turned to look at a general with a suite , who was galloping toward the knoll on a lathering horse .
It was Belliard .
Having dismounted he went up to the Emperor with rapid strides and in a loud voice began boldly demonstrating the necessity of sending reinforcements .
He swore on his honor that the Russians were lost if the Emperor would give another division .
Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and continued to pace up and down without replying .
Belliard began talking loudly and eagerly to the generals of the suite around him .
" You are very fiery , Belliard , " said Napoleon , when he again came up to the general .
" In the heat of a battle it is easy to make a mistake .
Go and have another look and then come back to me . "
Before Belliard was out of sight , a messenger from another part of the battlefield galloped up .
" Now then , what do you want ? "
asked Napoleon in the tone of a man irritated at being continually disturbed .
" Sire , the prince ... " began the adjutant .
" Asks for reinforcements ? " said Napoleon with an angry gesture .
The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and began to report , but the Emperor turned from him , took a couple of steps , stopped , came back , and called Berthier .
" We must give reserves , " he said , moving his arms slightly apart .
" Who do you think should be sent there ? " he asked of Berthier ( whom he subsequently termed " that gosling I have made an eagle " ) .
" Send Clapar`ede 's division , sire , " replied Berthier , who knew all the division 's regiments , and battalions by heart .
Napoleon nodded assent .
The adjutant galloped to Clapar`ede 's division and a few minutes later the Young Guards stationed behind the knoll moved forward .
Napoleon gazed silently in that direction .
" No ! " he suddenly said to Berthier . "
I ca n't send Clapar`ede .
Send Friant 's division . "
Though there was no advantage in sending Friant 's division instead of Clapar`ede 's , and even an obvious inconvenience and delay in stopping Clapar`ede and sending Friant now , the order was carried out exactly .
Napoleon did not notice that in regard to his army he was playing the part of a doctor who hinders by his medicines - a role he so justly understood and condemned .
Friant 's division disappeared as the others had done into the smoke of the battlefield .
From all sides adjutants continued to arrive at a gallop and as if by agreement all said the same thing .
They all asked for reinforcements and all said that the Russians were holding their positions and maintaining a hellish fire under which the French army was melting away .
Napoleon sat on a campstool , wrapped in thought .
M. de Beausset , the man so fond of travel , having fasted since morning , came up to the Emperor and ventured respectfully to suggest lunch to His Majesty .
" I hope I may now congratulate Your Majesty on a victory ? " said he .
Napoleon silently shook his head in negation .
Assuming the negation to refer only to the victory and not to the lunch , M. de Beausset ventured with respectful jocularity to remark that there is no reason for not having lunch when one can get it .
" Go away ... " exclaimed Napoleon suddenly and morosely , and turned aside .
A beatific smile of regret , repentance , and ecstasy beamed on M. de Beausset 's face and he glided away to the other generals .
Even the enemy was the same as at Austerlitz and Friedland - yet the terrible stroke of his arm had supernaturally become impotent .
So it had been at Lodi , Marengo , Arcola , Jena , Austerlitz , Wagram , and so on .
But now something strange was happening to his troops .
Despite news of the capture of the fl`eches , Napoleon saw that this was not the same , not at all the same , as what had happened in his former battles .
He saw that what he was feeling was felt by all the men about him experienced in the art of war .
All their faces looked dejected , and they all shunned one another 's eyes - only a de Beausset could fail to grasp the meaning of what was happening .
But Napoleon with his long experience of war well knew the meaning of a battle not gained by the attacking side in eight hours , after all efforts had been expended .
He knew that it was a lost battle and that the least accident might now - with the fight balanced on such a strained center - destroy him and his army .
The Russians might fall on his left wing , might break through his center , he himself might be killed by a stray cannon ball .
All this was possible .
In former battles he had only considered the possibilities of success , but now innumerable unlucky chances presented themselves , and he expected them all .
The news that the Russians were attacking the left flank of the French army aroused that horror in Napoleon .
He sat silently on a campstool below the knoll , with head bowed and elbows on his knees .
Berthier approached and suggested that they should ride along the line to ascertain the position of affairs .
" What ?
What do you say ? " asked Napoleon . "
Yes , tell them to bring me my horse . "
He mounted and rode toward Sem"enovsk .
Amid the powder smoke , slowly dispersing over the whole space through which Napoleon rode , horses and men were lying in pools of blood , singly or in heaps .
Neither Napoleon nor any of his generals had ever before seen such horrors or so many slain in such a small area .
The roar of guns , that had not ceased for ten hours , wearied the ear and gave a peculiar significance to the spectacle , as music does to tableaux vivants .
Napoleon rode up the high ground at Sem"enovsk , and through the smoke saw ranks of men in uniforms of a color unfamiliar to him .
They were Russians .
The Russians stood in serried ranks behind Sem"enovsk village and its knoll , and their guns boomed incessantly along their line and sent forth clouds of smoke .
It was no longer a battle : it was a continuous slaughter which could be of no avail either to the French or the Russians .
Napoleon stopped his horse and again fell into the reverie from which Berthier had aroused him .
One of the generals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer to lead the Old Guard into action .
Ney and Berthier , standing near Napoleon , exchanged looks and smiled contemptuously at this general 's senseless offer .
Napoleon bowed his head and remained silent a long time .
" At eight hundred leagues from France , I will not have my Guard destroyed ! " he said , and turning his horse rode back to Shev'ardino .
CHAPTER XXXV
On the rug - covered bench where Pierre had seen him in the morning sat Kut'uzov , his gray head hanging , his heavy body relaxed .
He gave no orders , but only assented to or dissented from what others suggested .
" Yes , yes , do that , " he replied to various proposals .
Kut'uzov 's general expression was one of concentrated quiet attention , and his face wore a strained look as if he found it difficult to master the fatigue of his old and feeble body .
At eleven o'clock they brought him news that the fl`eches captured by the French had been retaken , but that Prince Bagrati'on was wounded .
Kut'uzov groaned and swayed his head .
" Ride over to Prince Peter Iv'anovich and find out about it exactly , " he said to one of his adjutants , and then turned to the Duke of W"urttemberg who was standing behind him .
" Will Your Highness please take command of the first army ? "
Soon after the duke 's departure - before he could possibly have reached Sem"enovsk - his adjutant came back from him and told Kut'uzov that the duke asked for more troops .
When they brought him news that Murat had been taken prisoner , and the staff officers congratulated him , Kut'uzov smiled .
" Wait a little , gentlemen , " said he . "
The battle is won , and there is nothing extraordinary in the capture of Murat .
Still , it is better to wait before we rejoice . "
But he sent an adjutant to take the news round the army .
" Go , my dear fellow , " he said to Erm'olov , " and see whether something ca n't be done . "
Kut'uzov was in G'orki , near the center of the Russian position .
The attack directed by Napoleon against our left flank had been several times repulsed .
In the center the French had not got beyond Borodin'o , and on their left flank Uv'arov 's cavalry had put the French to flight .
Toward three o'clock the French attacks ceased .
On the faces of all who came from the field of battle , and of those who stood around him , Kut'uzov noticed an expression of extreme tension .
He was satisfied with the day 's success - a success exceeding his expectations , but the old man 's strength was failing him .
Several times his head dropped low as if it were falling and he dozed off .
Dinner was brought him .
Adjutant General Wolzogen , the man who when riding past Prince Andrew had said , " the war should be extended widely , " and whom Bagrati'on so detested , rode up while Kut'uzov was at dinner .
Wolzogen had come from Barclay de Tolly to report on the progress of affairs on the left flank .
Kut'uzov was chewing a piece of roast chicken with difficulty and glanced at Wolzogen with eyes that brightened under their puckering lids .
Wolzogen , nonchalantly stretching his legs , approached Kut'uzov with a half - contemptuous smile on his lips , scarcely touching the peak of his cap .
Kut'uzov ceased chewing and fixed an astonished gaze on Wolzogen , as if not understanding what was said to him .
Wolzogen , noticing " the old gentleman 's " agitation , said with a smile :
" I have not considered it right to conceal from your Serene Highness what I have seen .
The troops are in complete disorder .... "
" You have seen ?
You have seen ? ... " Kut'uzov shouted .
Frowning and rising quickly , he went up to Wolzogen .
" How ... how dare you ! ...
" he shouted , choking and making a threatening gesture with his trembling arms : " How dare you , sir , say that to me ?
You know nothing about it .
Tell General Barclay from me that his information is incorrect and that the real course of the battle is better known to me , the commander in chief , than to him . "
Wolzogen was about to make a rejoinder , but Kut'uzov interrupted him .
" The enemy has been repulsed on the left and defeated on the right flank .
If you have seen amiss , sir , do not allow yourself to say what you do n't know !
Be so good as to ride to General Barclay and inform him of my firm intention to attack the enemy tomorrow , " said Kut'uzov sternly .
All were silent , and the only sound audible was the heavy breathing of the panting old general .
" They are repulsed everywhere , for which I thank God and our brave army !
The enemy is beaten , and tomorrow we shall drive him from the sacred soil of Russia , " said Kut'uzov crossing himself , and he suddenly sobbed as his eyes filled with tears .
Wolzogen , shrugging his shoulders and curling his lips , stepped silently aside , marveling at " the old gentleman 's " conceited stupidity .
" Ah , here he is , my hero ! " said Kut'uzov to a portly , handsome , dark - haired general who was just ascending the knoll .
This was Ra'evski , who had spent the whole day at the most important part of the field of Borodin'o .
Ra'evski reported that the troops were firmly holding their ground and that the French no longer ventured to attack .
After hearing him , Kut'uzov said in French :
" Then you do not think , like some others , that we must retreat ? "
" On the contrary , your Highness , in indecisive actions it is always the most stubborn who remain victors , " replied Ra'evski , " and in my opinion ... "
" Kays'arov ! "
Kut'uzov called to his adjutant . "
Sit down and write out the order of the day for tomorrow .
And you , " he continued , addressing another , " ride along the line and announce that tomorrow we attack . "
While Kut'uzov was talking to Ra'evski and dictating the order of the day , Wolzogen returned from Barclay and said that General Barclay wished to have written confirmation of the order the field marshal had given .
Kut'uzov , without looking at Wolzogen , gave directions for the order to be written out which the former commander in chief , to avoid personal responsibility , very judiciously wished to receive .
It was far from being the same words or the same order that reached the farthest links of that chain .
And on learning that tomorrow they were to attack the enemy , and hearing from the highest quarters a confirmation of what they wanted to believe , the exhausted , wavering men felt comforted and inspirited .
CHAPTER XXXVI
Prince Andrew 's regiment was among the reserves which till after one o'clock were stationed inactive behind Sem"enovsk , under heavy artillery fire .
Without moving from that spot or firing a single shot the regiment here lost another third of its men .
With each fresh blow less and less chance of life remained for those not yet killed .
The regiment stood in columns of battalion , three hundred paces apart , but nevertheless the men were always in one and the same mood .
All alike were taciturn and morose .
Talk was rarely heard in the ranks , and it ceased altogether every time the thud of a successful shot and the cry of " stretchers ! " was heard .
Most of the time , by their officers ' order , the men sat on the ground .
Some built little houses of the tufts in the plowed ground , or plaited baskets from the straw in the cornfield .
All seemed fully absorbed in these pursuits .
But when our artillery or cavalry advanced or some of our infantry were seen to move forward , words of approval were heard on all sides .
But the liveliest attention was attracted by occurrences quite apart from , and unconnected with , the battle .
It was as if the minds of these morally exhausted men found relief in everyday , commonplace occurrences .
A battery of artillery was passing in front of the regiment .
The horse of an ammunition cart put its leg over a trace . "
Hey , look at the trace horse ! ...
Get her leg out !
She 'll fall ....
Ah , they do n't see it ! "
came identical shouts from the ranks all along the regiment .
Yells and shrieks of laughter rose from the whole regiment .
But such distractions lasted only a moment , and for eight hours the men had been inactive , without food , in constant fear of death , and their pale and gloomy faces grew ever paler and gloomier .
There was nothing for him to do and no orders to be given .
Everything went on of itself .
The killed were dragged from the front , the wounded carried away , and the ranks closed up .
If any soldiers ran to the rear they returned immediately and hastily .
All the powers of his soul , as of every soldier there , were unconsciously bent on avoiding the contemplation of the horrors of their situation .
Nothing remained of the previous day 's thoughts .
He thought of nothing .
Here it comes ...
this one is coming our way again !
" he thought , listening to an approaching whistle in the hidden region of smoke . "
One , another !
Again !
It has hit .... "
He stopped and looked at the ranks . "
No , it has gone over .
But this one has hit ! "
And again he started trying to reach the boundary strip in sixteen paces .
A whizz and a thud !
Five paces from him , a cannon ball tore up the dry earth and disappeared .
A chill ran down his back .
Again he glanced at the ranks .
Probably many had been hit - a large crowd had gathered near the second battalion .
" Adjutant ! "
he shouted .
" Order them not to crowd together . "
The adjutant , having obeyed this instruction , approached Prince Andrew .
From the other side a battalion commander rode up .
The horse first , regardless of whether it was right or wrong to show fear , snorted , reared almost throwing the major , and galloped aside .
The horse 's terror infected the men .
" Lie down ! " cried the adjutant , throwing himself flat on the ground .
Prince Andrew hesitated .
The smoking shell spun like a top between him and the prostrate adjutant , near a wormwood plant between the field and the meadow .
" Can this be death ? "
thought Prince Andrew , looking with a quite new , envious glance at the grass , the wormwood , and the streamlet of smoke that curled up from the rotating black ball .
" I can not , I do not wish to die .
I love life - I love this grass , this earth , this air .... "
He thought this , and at the same time remembered that people were looking at him .
" It 's shameful , sir ! "
he said to the adjutant .
" What ... "
He did not finish speaking .
Several officers ran up to him .
From the right side of his abdomen , blood was welling out making a large stain on the grass .
The militiamen with stretchers who were called up stood behind the officers .
Prince Andrew lay on his chest with his face in the grass , breathing heavily and noisily .
" What are you waiting for ?
Come along ! "
The peasants went up and took him by his shoulders and legs , but he moaned piteously and , exchanging looks , they set him down again .
" Pick him up , lift him , it 's all the same ! " cried someone .
They again took him by the shoulders and laid him on the stretcher .
" Ah , God !
My God !
What is it ?
The stomach ?
That means death !
My God!"-voices among the officers were heard saying .
" It flew a hair 's breadth past my ear , " said the adjutant .
The peasants , adjusting the stretcher to their shoulders , started hurriedly along the path they had trodden down , to the dressing station .
" Keep in step !
Ah ... those peasants ! " shouted an officer , seizing by their shoulders and checking the peasants , who were walking unevenly and jolting the stretcher .
" Get into step , F"edor ...
I say , F"edor ! "
said the foremost peasant .
" Now that 's right ! "
said the one behind joyfully , when he had got into step .
" Your excellency !
Eh , Prince ! " said the trembling voice of Tim'okhin , who had run up and was looking down on the stretcher .
Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked up at the speaker from the stretcher into which his head had sunk deep and again his eyelids drooped .
The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to the dressing station by the wood , where wagons were stationed .
The dressing station consisted of three tents with flaps turned back , pitched at the edge of a birch wood .
In the wood , wagons and horses were standing .
The horses were eating oats from their movable troughs and sparrows flew down and pecked the grains that fell .
Some crows , scenting blood , flew among the birch trees cawing impatiently .
Around the tents , over more than five acres , bloodstained men in various garbs stood , sat , or lay .
Around the wounded stood crowds of soldier stretcher - bearers with dismal and attentive faces , whom the officers keeping order tried in vain to drive from the spot .
Disregarding the officers ' orders , the soldiers stood leaning against their stretchers and gazing intently , as if trying to comprehend the difficult problem of what was taking place before them .
From the tents came now loud angry cries and now plaintive groans .
Occasionally dressers ran out to fetch water , or to point out those who were to be brought in next .
The wounded men awaiting their turn outside the tents groaned , sighed , wept , screamed , swore , or asked for vodka .
Some were delirious .
Prince Andrew 's bearers , stepping over the wounded who had not yet been bandaged , took him , as a regimental commander , close up to one of the tents and there stopped , awaiting instructions .
Prince Andrew opened his eyes and for a long time could not make out what was going on around him .
He remembered the meadow , the wormwood , the field , the whirling black ball , and his sudden rush of passionate love of life .
Two steps from him , leaning against a branch and talking loudly and attracting general attention , stood a tall , handsome , black - haired noncommissioned officer with a bandaged head .
He had been wounded in the head and leg by bullets .
Around him , eagerly listening to his talk , a crowd of wounded and stretcher - bearers was gathered .
" We kicked him out from there so that he chucked everything , we grabbed the King himself ! "
cried he , looking around him with eyes that glittered with fever .
" If only reserves had come up just then , lads , there would n't have been nothing left of him !
I tell you surely .... "
Like all the others near the speaker , Prince Andrew looked at him with shining eyes and experienced a sense of comfort . "
But is n't it all the same now ? " thought he . "
And what will be there , and what has there been here ?
Why was I so reluctant to part with life ?
There was something in this life I did not and do not understand . "
CHAPTER XXXVII
One of the doctors came out of the tent in a bloodstained apron , holding a cigar between the thumb and little finger of one of his small bloodstained hands , so as not to smear it .
He raised his head and looked about him , but above the level of the wounded men .
He evidently wanted a little respite .
After turning his head from right to left for some time , he sighed and looked down .
" All right , immediately , " he replied to a dresser who pointed Prince Andrew out to him , and he told them to carry him into the tent .
Murmurs arose among the wounded who were waiting .
" It seems that even in the next world only the gentry are to have a chance ! " remarked one .
Prince Andrew was carried in and laid on a table that had only just been cleared and which a dresser was washing down .
Prince Andrew could not make out distinctly what was in that tent .
The pitiful groans from all sides and the torturing pain in his thigh , stomach , and back distracted him .
Yes , it was the same flesh , the same chair ` a canon , the sight of which had even then filled him with horror , as by a presentiment .
There were three operating tables in the tent .
Two were occupied , and on the third they placed Prince Andrew .
For a little while he was left alone and involuntarily witnessed what was taking place on the other two tables .
On the nearest one sat a Tartar , probably a Cossack , judging by the uniform thrown down beside him .
Four soldiers were holding him , and a spectacled doctor was cutting into his muscular brown back .
On the other table , round which many people were crowding , a tall well - fed man lay on his back with his head thrown back .
His curly hair , its color , and the shape of his head seemed strangely familiar to Prince Andrew .
Several dressers were pressing on his chest to hold him down .
One large , white , plump leg twitched rapidly all the time with a feverish tremor .
The man was sobbing and choking convulsively .
Two doctors - one of whom was pale and trembling - were silently doing something to this man 's other , gory leg .
When he had finished with the Tartar , whom they covered with an overcoat , the spectacled doctor came up to Prince Andrew , wiping his hands .
He glanced at Prince Andrew 's face and quickly turned away .
" Undress him !
What are you waiting for ?
" he cried angrily to the dressers .
His very first , remotest recollections of childhood came back to Prince Andrew 's mind when the dresser with sleeves rolled up began hastily to undo the buttons of his clothes and undressed him .
The doctor bent down over the wound , felt it , and sighed deeply .
Then he made a sign to someone , and the torturing pain in his abdomen caused Prince Andrew to lose consciousness .
When he came to himself the splintered portions of his thighbone had been extracted , the torn flesh cut away , and the wound bandaged .
Water was being sprinkled on his face .
As soon as Prince Andrew opened his eyes , the doctor bent over , kissed him silently on the lips , and hurried away .
After the sufferings he had been enduring , Prince Andrew enjoyed a blissful feeling such as he had not experienced for a long time .
All the best and happiest moments of his life - especially his earliest childhood , when he used to be undressed and put to bed , and when leaning over him his nurse sang him to sleep and
he , burying his head in the pillow , felt happy in the mere consciousness of life - returned to his memory , not merely as something past but as something present .
The doctors were busily engaged with the wounded man the shape of whose head seemed familiar to Prince Andrew : they were lifting him up and trying to quiet him .
" Show it to me ....
Oh , ooh ...
Oh !
Oh , ooh ! "
his frightened moans could be heard , subdued by suffering and broken by sobs .
Hearing those moans Prince Andrew wanted to weep .
The wounded man was shown his amputated leg stained with clotted blood and with the boot still on .
" Oh ! Oh , ooh ! " he sobbed , like a woman .
The doctor who had been standing beside him , preventing Prince Andrew from seeing his face , moved away .
" My God !
What is this ?
Why is he here ? " said Prince Andrew to himself .
In the miserable , sobbing , enfeebled man whose leg had just been amputated , he recognized Anatole Kur'agin .
Men were supporting him in their arms and offering him a glass of water , but his trembling , swollen lips could not grasp its rim .
Anatole was sobbing painfully . "
Yes , it is he !
Yes , that man is somehow closely and painfully connected with me , " thought Prince Andrew , not yet clearly grasping what he saw before him .
" What is the connection of that man with my childhood and life ? " he asked himself without finding an answer .
And suddenly a new unexpected memory from that realm of pure and loving childhood presented itself to him .
He now remembered the connection that existed between himself and this man who was dimly gazing at him through tears that filled his swollen eyes .
He remembered everything , and ecstatic pity and love for that man overflowed his happy heart .
Prince Andrew could no longer restrain himself and wept tender loving tears for his fellow men , for himself , and for his own and their errors .
I did not understand - that is what made me sorry to part with life , that is what remained for me had I lived .
But now it is too late .
I know it ! "
CHAPTER XXXVIII
This day the horrible appearance of the battlefield overcame that strength of mind which he thought constituted his merit and his greatness .
With painful dejection he awaited the end of this action , in which he regarded himself as a participant and which he was unable to arrest .
A personal , human feeling for a brief moment got the better of the artificial phantasm of life he had served so long .
He felt in his own person the sufferings and death he had witnessed on the battlefield .
The heaviness of his head and chest reminded him of the possibility of suffering and death for himself .
At that moment he did not desire Moscow , or victory , or glory ( what need had he for any more glory ? ) .
The one thing he wished for was rest , tranquillity , and freedom .
But when he had been on the Sem"enovsk heights the artillery commander had proposed to him to bring several batteries of artillery up to those heights to strengthen the fire on the Russian troops crowded in front of Knyazk'ovo .
Napoleon had assented and had given orders that news should be brought to him of the effect those batteries produced .
An adjutant came now to inform him that the fire of two hundred guns had been concentrated on the Russians , as he had ordered , but that they still held their ground .
" Our fire is mowing them down by rows , but still they hold on , " said the adjutant .
" They want more ! ... " said Napoleon in a hoarse voice .
" Sire ? " asked the adjutant who had not heard the remark .
" They want more ! " croaked Napoleon frowning .
" Let them have it ! "
Even before he gave that order the thing he did not desire , and for which he gave the order only because he thought it was expected of him , was being done .
And not for that day and hour alone were the mind and conscience darkened of this man on whom the responsibility for what was happening lay more than on all the others who took part in it .
He could not disavow his actions , belauded as they were by half the world , and so he had to repudiate truth , goodness , and all humanity .
It was a war for a great cause , the end of uncertainties and the beginning of security .
A new horizon and new labors were opening out , full of well - being and prosperity for all .
The European system was already founded ; all that remained was to organize it .
Satisfied on these great points and with tranquility everywhere , I too should have had my Congress and my Holy Alliance .
Those ideas were stolen from me .
In that reunion of great sovereigns we should have discussed our interests like one family , and have rendered account to the peoples as clerk to master .
Europe would in this way soon have been , in fact , but one people , and anyone who traveled anywhere would have found himself always in the common fatherland .
I should have demanded the freedom of all navigable rivers for everybody , that the seas should be common to all , and that the great standing armies should be reduced henceforth to mere guards for the sovereigns .
On returning to France , to the bosom of the great , strong , magnificent , peaceful , and glorious fatherland , I should have proclaimed her frontiers immutable ; all future wars purely defensive , all aggrandizement antinational .
I should have associated my son in the Empire ; my dictatorship would have been finished , and his constitutional reign would have begun .
Paris would have been the capital of the world , and the French the envy of the nations !
He imagined that the war with Russia came about by his will , and the horrors that occurred did not stagger his soul .
He boldly took the whole responsibility for what happened , and his darkened mind found justification in the belief that among the hundreds of thousands who perished there were fewer Frenchmen than Hessians and Bavarians .
CHAPTER XXXIX
At the dressing stations the grass and earth were soaked with blood for a space of some three acres around .
Crowds of men of various arms , wounded and unwounded , with frightened faces , dragged themselves back to Mozh'aysk from the one army and back to Val'uevo from the other .
Other crowds , exhausted and hungry , went forward led by their officers .
Others held their ground and continued to fire .
Clouds gathered and drops of rain began to fall on the dead and wounded , on the frightened , exhausted , and hesitating men , as if to say : " Enough , men !
Enough !
Cease ... bethink yourselves !
What are you doing ? "
You may go and kill whom you please , but I do n't want to do so any more ! "
By evening this thought had ripened in every soul .
At any moment these men might have been seized with horror at what they were doing and might have thrown up everything and run away anywhere .
But neither the French nor the Russians made that effort , and the flame of battle burned slowly out .
The Russians did not make that effort because they were not attacking the French .
At the beginning of the battle they stood blocking the way to Moscow and they still did so at the end of the battle as at the beginning .
But the French did not make that effort .
Some historians say that Napoleon need only have used his Old Guards , who were intact , and the battle would have been won .
To speak of what would have happened had Napoleon sent his Guards is like talking of what would happen if autumn became spring .
It could not be .
Napoleon did not give his Guards , not because he did not want to , but because it could not be done .
All the generals , officers , and soldiers of the French army knew it could not be done , because the flagging spirit of the troops would not permit it .
The moral force of the attacking French army was exhausted .
BOOK ELEVEN : 1812
CHAPTER I
Absolute continuity of motion is not comprehensible to the human mind .
This problem seemed to the ancients insoluble .
The absurd answer ( that Achilles could never overtake the tortoise ) resulted from this : that motion was arbitrarily divided into discontinuous elements , whereas the motion both of Achilles and of the tortoise was continuous .
By adopting smaller and smaller elements of motion we only approach a solution of the problem , but never reach it .
A modern branch of mathematics having achieved the art of dealing with the infinitely small can now yield solutions in other more complex problems of motion which used to appear insoluble .
In seeking the laws of historical movement just the same thing happens .
The movement of humanity , arising as it does from innumerable arbitrary human wills , is continuous .
To understand the laws of this continuous movement is the aim of history .
But to arrive at these laws , resulting from the sum of all those human wills , man 's mind postulates arbitrary and disconnected units .
Historical science in its endeavor to draw nearer to truth continually takes smaller and smaller units for examination .
It needs no critical exertion to reduce utterly to dust any deductions drawn from history .
It is merely necessary to select some larger or smaller unit as the subject of observation - as criticism has every right to do , seeing that whatever unit history observes must always be arbitrarily selected .
The first fifteen years of the nineteenth century in Europe present an extraordinary movement of millions of people .
What was the cause of this movement , by what laws was it governed ?
asks the mind of man .
But the mind of man not only refuses to believe this explanation , but plainly says that this method of explanation is fallacious , because in it a weaker phenomenon is taken as the cause of a stronger .
The sum of human wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon , and only the sum of those wills first tolerated and then destroyed them .
" But every time there have been conquests there have been conquerors ; every time there has been a revolution in any state there have been great men , " says history .
The peasants say that a cold wind blows in late spring because the oaks are budding , and really every spring cold winds do blow when the oak is budding .
To that I must entirely change my point of view and study the laws of the movement of steam , of the bells , and of the wind .
History must do the same .
And attempts in this direction have already been made .
CHAPTER II
The forces of a dozen European nations burst into Russia .
The Russian army and people avoided a collision till Smol'ensk was reached , and again from Smol'ensk to Borodin'o .
The French army pushed on to Moscow , its goal , its impetus ever increasing as it neared its aim , just as the velocity of a falling body increases as it approaches the earth .
Behind it were seven hundred miles of hunger - stricken , hostile country ; ahead were a few dozen miles separating it from its goal .
Every soldier in Napoleon 's army felt this and the invasion moved on by its own momentum .
The more the Russian army retreated the more fiercely a spirit of hatred of the enemy flared up , and while it retreated the army increased and consolidated .
At Borodin'o a collision took place .
The Russians retreated eighty miles - to beyond Moscow - and the French reached Moscow and there came to a standstill .
For five weeks after that there was not a single battle .
The French did not move .
On the evening of the twenty - sixth of August , Kut'uzov and the whole Russian army were convinced that the battle of Borodin'o was a victory .
Kut'uzov reported so to the Emperor .
But all that evening and next day reports came in one after another of unheard - of losses , of the loss of half the army , and a fresh battle proved physically impossible .
Kut'uzov 's wish was to attack next day , and the whole army desired to do so .
But to make an attack the wish to do so is not sufficient , there must also be a possibility of doing it , and that possibility did not exist .
And the troops retired one more , last , day 's march , and abandoned Moscow to the enemy .
Why did he not take up a position before reaching Fil'i ?
Why did he not retire at once by the Kal'uga road , abandoning Moscow ?
and so on .
People accustomed to think in that way forget , or do not know , the inevitable conditions which always limit the activities of any commander in chief .
A commander in chief is never dealing with the beginning of any event - the position from which we always contemplate it .
The commander in chief is always in the midst of a series of shifting events and so he never can at any moment consider the whole import of an event that is occurring .
Learned military authorities quite seriously tell us that Kut'uzov should have moved his army to the Kal'uga road long before reaching Fil'i , and that somebody actually submitted such a proposal to him .
But a commander in chief , especially at a difficult moment , has always before him not one proposal but dozens simultaneously .
And all these proposals , based on strategics and tactics , contradict each other .
A commander in chief 's business , it would seem , is simply to choose one of these projects .
But even that he can not do .
Events and time do not wait .
For instance , on the twenty - eighth it is suggested to him to cross to the Kal'uga road , but just then an adjutant gallops up from Milor'adovich asking whether he is to engage the French or retire .
An order must be given him at once , that instant .
And the order to retreat carries us past the turn to the Kal'uga road .
When had that question been settled ?
CHAPTER III
When Erm'olov , having been sent by Kut'uzov to inspect the position , told the field marshal that it was impossible to fight there before Moscow and that they must retreat , Kut'uzov looked at him in silence .
" Give me your hand , " said he and , turning it over so as to feel the pulse , added : " You are not well , my dear fellow .
Think what you are saying ! "
Kut'uzov could not yet admit the possibility of retreating beyond Moscow without a battle .
On the Pokl'onny Hill , four miles from the Dorogom'ilov gate of Moscow , Kut'uzov got out of his carriage and sat down on a bench by the roadside .
A great crowd of generals gathered round him , and Count Rostopch'in , who had come out from Moscow , joined them .
This brilliant company separated into several groups who all discussed the advantages and disadvantages of the position , the state of the army , the plans suggested , the situation of Moscow , and military questions generally .
Though they had not been summoned for the purpose , and though it was not so called , they all felt that this was really a council of war .
The conversations all dealt with public questions .
If anyone gave or asked for personal news , it was done in a whisper and they immediately reverted to general matters .
No jokes , or laughter , or smiles even , were seen among all these men .
They evidently all made an effort to hold themselves at the height the situation demanded .
And all these groups , while talking among themselves , tried to keep near the commander in chief ( whose bench formed the center of the gathering ) and to speak so that he might overhear them .
The commander in chief listened to what was being said and sometimes asked them to repeat their remarks , but did not himself take part in the conversations or express any opinion .
After hearing what was being said by one or other of these groups he generally turned away with an air of disappointment , as though they were not speaking of anything he wished to hear .
Some discussed the position that had been chosen , criticizing not the position itself so much as the mental capacity of those who had chosen it .
Others argued that a mistake had been made earlier and that a battle should have been fought two days before .
Others again spoke of the battle of Salamanca , which was described by Crosart , a newly arrived Frenchman in a Spanish uniform .
( This Frenchman and one of the German princes serving with the Russian army were discussing the siege of Saragossa and considering the possibility of defending Moscow in a similar manner . )
A fifth group , displaying the profundity of their strategic perceptions , discussed the direction the troops would now have to take .
A sixth group was talking absolute nonsense .
Kut'uzov 's expression grew more and more preoccupied and gloomy .
It would not take place because the commanders not merely all recognized the position to be impossible , but in their conversations were only discussing what would happen after its inevitable abandonment .
How could the commanders lead their troops to a field of battle they considered impossible to hold ?
The lower - grade officers and even the soldiers ( who too reason ) also considered the position impossible and therefore could not go to fight , fully convinced as they were of defeat .
If Bennigsen insisted on the position being defended and others still discussed it , the question was no longer important in itself but only as a pretext for disputes and intrigue .
This Kut'uzov knew well .
Bennigsen , who had chosen the position , warmly displayed his Russian patriotism ( Kut'uzov could not listen to this without wincing ) by insisting that Moscow must be defended .
But this intrigue did not now occupy the old man 's mind .
One terrible question absorbed him and to that question he heard no reply from anyone .
The question for him now was : " Have I really allowed Napoleon to reach Moscow , and when did I do so ?
When was it decided ?
Can it have been yesterday when I ordered Pl'atov to retreat , or was it the evening before , when I had a nap and told Bennigsen to issue orders ?
Or was it earlier still ? ...
When , when was this terrible affair decided ?
Moscow must be abandoned .
The army must retreat and the order to do so must be given . "
To give that terrible order seemed to him equivalent to resigning the command of the army .
But something had to be decided , and these conversations around him which were assuming too free a character must be stopped .
He called the most important generals to him .
" My head , be it good or bad , must depend on itself , " said he , rising from the bench , and he rode to Fil'i where his carriages were waiting .
CHAPTER IV
The Council of War began to assemble at two in the afternoon in the better and roomier part of Andrew Savosty'anov 's hut .
The men , women , and children of the large peasant family crowded into the back room across the passage .
" Granddad " himself , as Mal'asha in her own mind called Kut'uzov , sat apart in a dark corner behind the oven .
He sat , sunk deep in a folding armchair , and continually cleared his throat and pulled at the collar of his coat which , though it was unbuttoned , still seemed to pinch his neck .
Those who entered went up one by one to the field marshal ; he pressed the hands of some and nodded to others .
His adjutant Kays'arov was about to draw back the curtain of the window facing Kut'uzov , but the latter moved his hand angrily and Kays'arov understood that his Serene Highness did not wish his face to be seen .
Round the peasant 's deal table , on which lay maps , plans , pencils , and papers , so many people gathered that the orderlies brought in another bench and put it beside the table .
Erm'olov , Kays'arov , and Toll , who had just arrived , sat down on this bench .
In the foremost place , immediately under the icons , sat Barclay de Tolly , his high forehead merging into his bald crown .
He had a St. George 's Cross round his neck and looked pale and ill .
He had been feverish for two days and was now shivering and in pain .
Beside him sat Uv'arov , who with rapid gesticulations was giving him some information , speaking in low tones as they all did .
Chubby little Dokht'urov was listening attentively with eyebrows raised and arms folded on his stomach .
On the other side sat Count Ostermann - Tolst'oy , seemingly absorbed in his own thoughts .
His broad head with its bold features and glittering eyes was resting on his hand .
Ra'evski , twitching forward the black hair on his temples as was his habit , glanced now at Kut'uzov and now at the door with a look of impatience .
Konovn'itsyn 's firm , handsome , and kindly face was lit up by a tender , sly smile .
His glance met Mal'asha 's , and the expression of his eyes caused the little girl to smile .
They were all waiting for Bennigsen , who on the pretext of inspecting the position was finishing his savory dinner .
They waited for him from four till six o'clock and did not begin their deliberations all that time but talked in low tones of other matters .
Only when Bennigsen had entered the hut did Kut'uzov leave his corner and draw toward the table , but not near enough for the candles that had been placed there to light up his face .
Bennigsen opened the council with the question : " Are we to abandon Russia 's ancient and sacred capital without a struggle , or are we to defend it ? "
A prolonged and general silence followed .
There was a frown on every face and only Kut'uzov 's angry grunts and occasional cough broke the silence .
All eyes were gazing at him .
Mal'asha too looked at " Granddad . "
She was nearest to him and saw how his face puckered ; he seemed about to cry , but this did not last long .
" Russia 's ancient and sacred capital ! " he suddenly said , repeating Bennigsen 's words in an angry voice and thereby drawing attention to the false note in them . "
Allow me to tell you , your excellency , that that question has no meaning for a Russian . "
( He lurched his heavy body forward . )
" Such a question can not be put ; it is senseless !
The question I have asked these gentlemen to meet to discuss is a military one .
The question is that of saving Russia .
Is it better to give up Moscow without a battle , or by accepting battle to risk losing the army as well as Moscow ?
That is the question on which I want your opinion , " and he sank back in his chair .
The discussion began .
Bennigsen did not yet consider his game lost .
Opinions were divided , and arguments were advanced for and against that project .
Erm'olov , Dokht'urov , and Ra'evski agreed with Bennigsen .
The other generals , however , understood it and , leaving aside the question of Moscow , spoke of the direction the army should take in its retreat .
Mal'asha , who kept her eyes fixed on what was going on before her , understood the meaning of the council differently .
It seemed to her that it was only a personal struggle between " Granddad " and " Long - coat " as she termed Bennigsen .
She saw that they grew spiteful when they spoke to one another , and in her heart she sided with " Granddad . "
Bennigsen suddenly reddened and paced angrily up and down the room .
What so affected him was Kut'uzov 's calm and quiet comment on the advantage or disadvantage of Bennigsen 's proposal to move troops by night from the right to the left flank to attack the French right wing .
" Gentlemen , " said Kut'uzov , " I can not approve of the count 's plan .
Moving troops in close proximity to an enemy is always dangerous , and military history supports that view .
There followed a momentary pause , which seemed very long to them all .
The discussion recommenced , but pauses frequently occurred and they all felt that there was no more to be said .
During one of these pauses Kut'uzov heaved a deep sigh as if preparing to speak .
They all looked at him .
" Well , gentlemen , I see that it is I who will have to pay for the broken crockery , " said he , and rising slowly he moved to the table .
" Gentlemen , I have heard your views .
Some of you will not agree with me .
But I , " he paused , " by the authority entrusted to me by my Sovereign and country , order a retreat . "
After that the generals began to disperse with the solemnity and circumspect silence of people who are leaving , after a funeral .
Some of the generals , in low tones and in a strain very different from the way they had spoken during the council , communicated something to their commander in chief .
When he had dismissed the generals Kut'uzov sat a long time with his elbows on the table , thinking always of the same terrible question : " When , when did the abandonment of Moscow become inevitable ?
When was that done which settled the matter ?
And who was to blame for it ? "
" I did not expect this , " said he to his adjutant Schneider when the latter came in late that night .
" I did not expect this !
I did not think this would happen . "
" You should take some rest , your Serene Highness , " replied Schneider .
" But no !
They shall eat horseflesh yet , like the Turks ! "
exclaimed Kut'uzov without replying , striking the table with his podgy fist .
" They shall too , if only ... "
CHAPTER V
After the battle of Borodin'o the abandonment and burning of Moscow was as inevitable as the retreat of the army beyond Moscow without fighting .
Every Russian might have predicted it , not by reasoning but by the feeling implanted in each of us and in our fathers .
The same thing that took place in Moscow had happened in all the towns and villages on Russian soil beginning with Smol'ensk , without the participation of Count Rostopch'in and his broadsheets .
And as soon as the enemy drew near the wealthy classes went away abandoning their property , while the poorer remained and burned and destroyed what was left .
The consciousness that this would be so and would always be so was and is present in the heart of every Russian .
And a consciousness of this , and a foreboding that Moscow would be taken , was present in Russian Moscow society in 1812 .
Those who had quitted Moscow already in July and at the beginning of August showed that they expected this .
" It is disgraceful to run away from danger ; only cowards are running away from Moscow , " they were told .
In his broadsheets Rostopch'in impressed on them that to leave Moscow was shameful .
They were ashamed to be called cowards , ashamed to leave , but still they left , knowing it had to be done .
Why did they go ?
It is impossible to suppose that Rostopch'in had scared them by his accounts of horrors Napoleon had committed in conquered countries .
They went away because for Russians there could be no question as to whether things would go well or ill under French rule in Moscow .
It was out of the question to be under French rule , it would be the worst thing that could happen .
They went away without thinking of the tremendous significance of that immense and wealthy city being given over to destruction , for a great city with wooden buildings was certain when abandoned by its inhabitants to be burned .
They went away each on his own account , and yet it was only in consequence of their going away that the momentous event was accomplished that will always remain the greatest glory of the Russian people .
CHAPTER VI
H'el`ene , having returned with the court from V'ilna to Petersburg , found herself in a difficult position .
In Petersburg she had enjoyed the special protection of a grandee who occupied one of the highest posts in the Empire .
In V'ilna she had formed an intimacy with a young foreign prince .
When she returned to Petersburg both the magnate and the prince were there , and both claimed their rights .
H'el`ene was faced by a new problem - how to preserve her intimacy with both without offending either .
What would have seemed difficult or even impossible to another woman did not cause the least embarrassment to Countess Bez'ukhova , who evidently deserved her reputation of being a very clever woman .
Had she attempted concealment , or tried to extricate herself from her awkward position by cunning , she would have spoiled her case by acknowledging herself guilty .
The first time the young foreigner allowed himself to reproach her , she lifted her beautiful head and , half turning to him , said firmly : " That 's just like a man - selfish and cruel !
I expected nothing else .
A woman sacrifices herself for you , she suffers , and this is her reward !
What right have you , monseigneur , to demand an account of my attachments and friendships ?
He is a man who has been more than a father to me ! "
The prince was about to say something , but H'el`ene interrupted him .
I am not a man , that I should repay kindness with ingratitude !
Know , monseigneur ,
that in all that relates to my intimate feelings I render account only to God and to my conscience , " she concluded , laying her hand on her beautiful , fully expanded bosom and looking up to heaven .
" But for heaven 's sake listen to me ! "
" Marry me , and I will be your slave ! "
" But that 's impossible . "
" You wo n't deign to demean yourself by marrying me , you ... " said H'el`ene , beginning to cry .
" But the law , religion ... " said the prince , already yielding .
" The law , religion ... What have they been invented for if they ca n't arrange that ? " said H'el`ene .
The prince was surprised that so simple an idea had not occurred to him , and he applied for advice to the holy brethren of the Society of Jesus , with whom he was on intimate terms .
H'el`ene was touched , and more than once tears rose to her eyes and to those of Monsieur de Jobert and their voices trembled .
* Lay member of the Society of Jesus .
One day he took the countess to a Roman Catholic church , where she knelt down before the altar to which she was led .
The enchanting , middle - aged Frenchman laid his hands on her head and , as she herself afterward described it , she felt something like a fresh breeze wafted into her soul .
It was explained to her that this was la gr^ace .
After that a long - frocked abb'e was brought to her .
She confessed to him , and he absolved her from her sins .
Next day she received a box containing the Sacred Host , which was left at her house for her to partake of .
A few days later H'el`ene learned with pleasure that she had now been admitted to the true Catholic Church and that in a few days the Pope himself would hear of her and would send her a certain document .
In her view the aim of every religion was merely to preserve certain proprieties while affording satisfaction to human desires .
And with this aim , in one of her talks with her Father Confessor , she insisted on an answer to the question , in how far was she bound by her marriage ?
They were sitting in the twilight by a window in the drawing room .
The scent of flowers came in at the window .
H'el`ene was wearing a white dress , transparent over her shoulders and bosom .
H'el`ene with an uneasy smile looked at his curly hair and his plump , clean - shaven , blackish cheeks and every moment expected the conversation to take a fresh turn .
But the abb'e , though he evidently enjoyed the beauty of his companion , was absorbed in his mastery of the matter .
That marriage lacked the dual significance it should have had .
Yet in spite of this your vow was binding .
You swerved from it .
What did you commit by so acting ?
A venial , or a mortal , sin ?
A venial sin , for you acted without evil intention .
If now you married again with the object of bearing children , your sin might be forgiven .
But the question is again a twofold one : firstly ... "
But suddenly H'el`ene , who was getting bored , said with one of her bewitching smiles : "
But I think that having espoused the true religion I can not be bound by what a false religion laid upon me . "
The director of her conscience was astounded at having the case presented to him thus with the simplicity of Columbus ' egg .
He was delighted at the unexpected rapidity of his pupil 's progress , but could not abandon the edifice of argument he had laboriously constructed .
" Let us understand one another , Countess , " said he with a smile , and began refuting his spiritual daughter 's arguments .
CHAPTER VII
So she decided that it was necessary to prepare the opinion of society .
The question was no longer whether this was possible , but only which was the better match and how the matter would be regarded at court .
Only M'arya Dm'itrievna Akhros'imova , who had come to Petersburg that summer to see one of her sons , allowed herself plainly to express an opinion contrary to the general one .
Meeting H'el`ene at a ball
she stopped her in the middle of the room and , amid general silence , said in her gruff voice : " So wives of living men have started marrying again !
Perhaps you think you have invented a novelty ?
You have been forestalled , my dear !
It was thought of long ago .
It is done in all the brothels , " and with these words M'arya Dm'itrievna , turning up her wide sleeves with her usual threatening gesture and glancing sternly round , moved across the room .
Prince Vas'ili , who of late very often forgot what he had said and repeated one and the same thing a hundred times , remarked to his daughter whenever he chanced to see her :
" H'el`ene , I have a word to say to you , " and he would lead her aside , drawing her hand downward .
" I have heard of certain projects concerning ...
you know .
Well my dear child , you know how your father 's heart rejoices to know that you ...
You have suffered so much ....
But , my dear child , consult only your own heart .
That is all I have to say , " and concealing his unvarying emotion he would press his cheek against his daughter 's and move away .
" Listen , Bil'ibin , " said H'el`ene
( she always called friends of that sort by their surnames ) , and she touched his coat sleeve with her white , beringed fingers . "
Tell me , as you would a sister , what I ought to do .
Which of the two ? "
Bil'ibin wrinkled up the skin over his eyebrows and pondered , with a smile on his lips .
" You are not taking me unawares , you know , " said he .
" As a true friend , I have thought and thought again about your affair .
You see , if you marry the prince "- he meant the younger man - and he crooked one finger , " you forever lose the chance of marrying the other , and you will displease the court besides .
( You know there is some kind of connection . )
But if you marry the old count you will make his last days happy , and as widow of the Grand ...
the prince would no longer be making a m'esalliance by marrying you , " and Bil'ibin smoothed out his forehead .
" That 's a true friend ! " said H'el`ene beaming , and again touching Bil'ibin 's sleeve .
"
But I love them , you know , and do n't want to distress either of them .
I would give my life for the happiness of them both . "
Bil'ibin shrugged his shoulders , as much as to say that not even he could help in that difficulty .
" Une ma^itresse - femme !
*
That 's what is called putting things squarely .
She would like to be married to all three at the same time , " thought he .
* A masterly woman .
" But tell me , how will your husband look at the matter ? "
Bil'ibin asked , his reputation being so well established that he did not fear to ask so na"ive a question . "
Will he agree ? "
" Oh , he loves me so ! " said H'el`ene , who for some reason imagined that Pierre too loved her . "
He will do anything for me . "
Bil'ibin puckered his skin in preparation for something witty .
" Even divorce you ? " said he .
H'el`ene laughed .
Among those who ventured to doubt the justifiability of the proposed marriage was H'el`ene 's mother , Princess Kur'agina .
She was continually tormented by jealousy of her daughter , and now that jealousy concerned a subject near to her own heart , she could not reconcile herself to the idea .
Armed with these arguments , which appeared to her unanswerable , she drove to her daughter 's early one morning so as to find her alone .
Having listened to her mother 's objections , H'el`ene smiled blandly and ironically .
" But it says plainly : ' Whosoever shall marry her that is divorced ... ' " said the old princess .
" Ah , Maman , ne dites pas de b^etises .
Vous ne comprenez rien .
Dans ma position j'ai des devoirs , " * said H'el`ene changing from Russian , in which language she always felt that her case did not sound quite clear , into French which suited it better .
* " Oh , Mamma , do n't talk nonsense !
You do n't understand anything .
In my position I have obligations . "
" But , my dear .... "
" Oh , Mamma , how is it you do n't understand that the Holy Father , who has the right to grant dispensations ... "
Just then the lady companion who lived with H'el`ene came in to announce that His Highness was in the ballroom and wished to see her .
" Non , dites - lui que je ne veux pas
le voir , que je suis furieuse contre lui , parce qu'il m'a manqu'e parole . "
*
* " No , tell him I do n't wish to see him , I am furious with him for not keeping his word to me . "
" Comtesse , ` a tout p'ech'e mis'ericorde , " * said a fair - haired young man with a long face and nose , as he entered the room .
* " Countess , there is mercy for every sin . "
The old princess rose respectfully and curtsied .
The young man who had entered took no notice of her .
The princess nodded to her daughter and sidled out of the room .
" Yes , she is right , " thought the old princess , all her convictions dissipated by the appearance of His Highness .
" She is right , but how is it that we in our irrecoverable youth did not know it ?
Yet it is so simple , " she thought as she got into her carriage .
And so I pray God to have you , my friend , in His holy and powerful keeping - Your friend
H'el`ene .
This letter was brought to Pierre 's house when he was on the field of Borodin'o .
CHAPTER VIII
He felt that only in the ordinary conditions of life would he be able to understand himself and all he had seen and felt .
But such ordinary conditions of life were nowhere to be found .
Though shells and bullets did not whistle over the road along which he was going , still on all sides there was what there had been on the field of battle .
Having gone a couple of miles along the Mozh'aysk road , Pierre sat down by the roadside .
Dusk had fallen , and the roar of guns died away .
Pierre lay leaning on his elbow for a long time , gazing at the shadows that moved past him in the darkness .
He was continually imagining that a cannon ball was flying toward him with a terrific whizz , and then he shuddered and sat up .
He had no idea how long he had been there .
In the middle of the night three soldiers , having brought some firewood , settled down near him and began lighting a fire .
The soldiers , who threw sidelong glances at Pierre , got the fire to burn and placed an iron pot on it into which they broke some dried bread and put a little dripping .
The pleasant odor of greasy viands mingled with the smell of smoke .
Pierre sat up and sighed .
The three soldiers were eating and talking among themselves , taking no notice of him .
" I , I ... " said Pierre , feeling it necessary to minimize his social position as much as possible so as to be nearer to the soldiers and better understood by them . "
By rights I am a militia officer , but my men are not here .
I came to the battle and have lost them . "
" There now ! " said one of the soldiers .
Another shook his head .
" Would you like a little mash ? " the first soldier asked , and handed Pierre a wooden spoon after licking it clean .
Pierre sat down by the fire and began eating the mash , as they called the food in the cauldron , and he thought it more delicious than any food he had ever tasted .
As he sat bending greedily over it , helping himself to large spoonfuls and chewing one after another , his face was lit up by the fire and the soldiers looked at him in silence .
" Where have you to go to ?
Tell us ! "
said one of them .
" To Mozh'aysk . "
" You 're a gentleman , are n't you ? "
" Yes . "
" And what 's your name ? "
" Peter Kir'ilych . "
" Well then , Peter Kir'ilych , come along with us , we 'll take you there . "
In the total darkness the soldiers walked with Pierre to Mozh'aysk .
By the time they got near Mozh'aysk and began ascending the steep hill into the town , the cocks were already crowing .
Pierre went on with the soldiers , quite forgetting that his inn was at the bottom of the hill and that he had already passed it .
The groom recognized Pierre in the darkness by his white hat .
" Your excellency ! "
he said .
" Why , we were beginning to despair !
How is it you are on foot ?
And where are you going , please ? "
" Oh , yes ! " said Pierre .
The soldiers stopped .
" So you 've found your folk ? " said one of them .
"
Well , good - by , Peter Kir'ilych - isn't it ? "
" Good - by , Peter Kir'ilych ! "
Pierre heard the other voices repeat .
" Good - by !
" he said and turned with his groom toward the inn .
" I ought to give them something ! " he thought , and felt in his pocket . "
No , better not ! " said another , inner voice .
There was not a room to be had at the inn , they were all occupied .
Pierre went out into the yard and , covering himself up head and all , lay down in his carriage .
CHAPTER IX
Filled with fright he opened his eyes and lifted his head from under his cloak .
All was tranquil in the yard .
Only someone 's orderly passed through the gateway , splashing through the mud , and talked to the innkeeper .
Above Pierre 's head some pigeons , disturbed by the movement he had made in sitting up , fluttered under the dark roof of the penthouse .
The whole courtyard was permeated by a strong peaceful smell of stable yards , delightful to Pierre at that moment .
He could see the clear starry sky between the dark roofs of two penthouses .
" Thank God , there is no more of that ! " he thought , covering up his head again . "
Oh , what a terrible thing is fear , and how shamefully I yielded to it !
But they ... they were steady and calm all the time , to the end ... " thought he .
They , in Pierre 's mind , were the soldiers , those who had been at the battery , those who had given him food , and those who had prayed before the icon .
They , those strange men he had not previously known , stood out clearly and sharply from everyone else .
" To be a soldier , just a soldier ! " thought Pierre as he fell asleep , " to enter communal life completely , to be imbued by what makes them what they are .
But how cast off all the superfluous , devilish burden of my outer man ?
There was a time when I could have done it .
I could have run away from my father , as I wanted to .
Or I might have been sent to serve as a soldier after the duel with D'olokhov . "
And the memory of the dinner at the English Club when he had challenged D'olokhov flashed through Pierre 's mind , and then he remembered his benefactor at Torzh'ok .
And now a picture of a solemn meeting of the lodge presented itself to his mind .
It was taking place at the English Club and someone near and dear to him sat at the end of the table . "
Yes , that is he !
It is my benefactor .
But he died ! " thought Pierre . "
Yes , he died , and I did not know he was alive .
How sorry I am that he died , and how glad I am that he is alive again ! "
And they with their simple , kind , firm faces surrounded his benefactor on all sides .
But though they were kindly they did not look at Pierre and did not know him .
Wishing to speak and to attract their attention , he got up , but at that moment his legs grew cold and bare .
He felt ashamed , and with one arm covered his legs from which his cloak had in fact slipped .
" It is dawn , " thought Pierre . "
But that 's not what I want .
I want to hear and understand my benefactor 's words . "
Again he covered himself up with his cloak , but now neither the lodge nor his benefactor was there .
There were only thoughts clearly expressed in words , thoughts that someone was uttering or that he himself was formulating .
Afterwards when he recalled those thoughts Pierre was convinced that someone outside himself had spoken them , though the impressions of that day had evoked them .
He had never , it seemed to him , been able to think and express his thoughts like that when awake .
" To endure war is the most difficult subordination of man 's freedom to the law of God , " the voice had said .
" Simplicity is submission to the will of God ; you can not escape from Him .
And they are simple .
They do not talk , but act .
The spoken word is silver but the unspoken is golden .
Man can be master of nothing while he fears death , but he who does not fear it possesses all .
If there were no suffering , man would not know his limitations , would not know himself .
The hardest thing ( Pierre went on thinking , or hearing , in his dream ) is to be able in your soul to unite the meaning of all .
To unite all ? " he asked himself . "
No , not to unite .
Thoughts can not be united , but to harness all these thoughts together is what we need !
Yes , one must harness them , must harness them !
" he repeated to himself with inward rapture , feeling that these words and they alone expressed what he wanted to say and solved the question that tormented him .
" Yes , one must harness , it is time to harness . "
" Time to harness , time to harness , your excellency !
Your excellency ! "
some voice was repeating .
" We must harness , it is time to harness .... "
It was the voice of the groom , trying to wake him .
The sun shone straight into Pierre 's face .
He glanced at the dirty innyard in the middle of which soldiers were watering their lean horses at the pump while carts were passing out of the gate .
Pierre turned away with repugnance , and closing his eyes quickly fell back on the carriage seat . "
No , I do n't want that
, I do n't want to see and understand that .
I want to understand what was revealing itself to me in my dream .
One second more
and I should have understood it all !
But what am I to do ?
Harness , but how can I harness everything ? "
and Pierre felt with horror that the meaning of all he had seen and thought in the dream had been destroyed .
The groom , the coachman , and the innkeeper told Pierre that an officer had come with news that the French were already near Mozh'aysk and that our men were leaving it .
Pierre got up and , having told them to harness and overtake him , went on foot through the town .
The troops were moving on , leaving about ten thousand wounded behind them .
There were wounded in the yards , at the windows of the houses , and the streets were crowded with them .
In the streets , around carts that were to take some of the wounded away , shouts , curses , and blows could be heard .
Pierre offered the use of his carriage , which had overtaken him , to a wounded general he knew , and drove with him to Moscow .
On the way Pierre was told of the death of his brother - in - law Anatole and of that of Prince Andrew .
CHAPTER X
On the thirtieth of August Pierre reached Moscow .
Close to the gates of the city he was met by Count Rostopch'in 's adjutant .
" We have been looking for you everywhere , " said the adjutant .
" The count wants to see you particularly .
He asks you to come to him at once on a very important matter . "
Without going home , Pierre took a cab and drove to see the Moscow commander in chief .
Count Rostopch'in had only that morning returned to town from his summer villa at Sok'olniki .
The anteroom and reception room of his house were full of officials who had been summoned or had come for orders .
Vas'ilchikov and Pl'atov had already seen the count and explained to him that it was impossible to defend Moscow and that it would have to be surrendered .
As Pierre was entering the reception room a courier from the army came out of Rostopch'in 's private room .
In answer to questions with which he was greeted , the courier made a despairing gesture with his hand and passed through the room .
While waiting in the reception room Pierre with weary eyes watched the various officials , old and young , military and civilian , who were there .
They all seemed dissatisfied and uneasy .
Pierre went up to a group of men , one of whom he knew .
After greeting Pierre they continued their conversation .
" If they 're sent out and brought back again later on it will do no harm , but as things are now one ca n't answer for anything . "
" But you see what he writes ... " said another , pointing to a printed sheet he held in his hand .
" That 's another matter .
That 's necessary for the people , " said the first .
" What is it ? " asked Pierre .
" Oh , it 's a fresh broadsheet . "
Pierre took it and began reading .
His Serene Highness has passed through Mozh'aysk in order to join up with the troops moving toward him and has taken up a strong position where the enemy will not soon attack him .
Forty - eight guns with ammunition have been sent him from here , and his Serene Highness says he will defend Moscow to the last drop of blood and is even ready to fight in the streets .
Do not be upset , brothers , that the law courts are closed ; things have to be put in order , and we will deal with villains in our own way !
When the time comes I shall want both town and peasant lads and will raise the cry a day or two beforehand , but they are not wanted yet
so I hold my peace .
An ax will be useful , a hunting spear not bad , but a three - pronged fork will be best of all : a Frenchman is no heavier than a sheaf of rye .
Tomorrow after dinner I shall take the Iberian icon of the Mother of God to the wounded in the Catherine Hospital where we will have some water blessed .
That will help them to get well quicker .
I , too , am well now : one of my eyes was sore
but now I am on the lookout with both .
" But military men have told me that it is impossible to fight in the town , " said Pierre , " and that the position ... "
" Well , of course !
That 's what we were saying , " replied the first speaker .
" And what does he mean by ' One of my eyes was sore
but now I am on the lookout with both ' ? " asked Pierre .
" The count had a sty , " replied the adjutant smiling , " and was very much upset when I told him people had come to ask what was the matter with him .
By the by , Count , " he added suddenly , addressing Pierre with a smile , " we heard that you have family troubles and that the countess , your wife ... "
" I have heard nothing , " Pierre replied unconcernedly .
" But what have you heard ? "
" Oh , well , you know people often invent things .
I only say what I heard . "
" But what did you hear ? "
" Well , they say , " continued the adjutant with the same smile , " that the countess , your wife , is preparing to go abroad .
I expect it 's nonsense .... "
" Possibly , " remarked Pierre , looking about him absent - mindedly . "
And who is that ?
" he asked , indicating a short old man in a clean blue peasant overcoat , with a big snow - white beard and eyebrows and a ruddy face .
" He ?
That 's a tradesman , that is to say , he 's the restaurant keeper , Vereshch'agin .
Perhaps you have heard of that affair with the proclamation . "
" Oh , so that is Vereshch'agin ! " said Pierre , looking at the firm , calm face of the old man and seeking any indication of his being a traitor .
" That 's not he himself , that 's the father of the fellow who wrote the proclamation , " said the adjutant .
" The young man is in prison and I expect it will go hard with him . "
An old gentleman wearing a star and another official , a German wearing a cross round his neck , approached the speaker .
" It 's a complicated story , you know , " said the adjutant .
" That proclamation appeared about two months ago .
The count was informed of it .
He gave orders to investigate the matter .
Gabriel Iv'anovich here made the inquiries .
The proclamation had passed through exactly sixty - three hands .
He asked one , ' From whom did you get it ? ' '
From so - and - so . '
He went to the next one . '
From whom did you get it ? '
and so on till he reached Vereshch'agin , a half educated tradesman , you know , ' a pet of a trader , ' " said the adjutant smiling .
" They asked him , ' Who gave it you ? '
And the point is that we knew whom he had it from .
He could only have had it from the Postmaster .
But evidently they had come to some understanding .
He replied : ' From no one ; I made it up myself . '
They threatened and questioned him , but he stuck to that : ' I made it up myself . '
And so it was reported to the count , who sent for the man . '
From whom did you get the proclamation ? ' '
I wrote it myself . '
Well , you know the count , " said the adjutant cheerfully , with a smile of pride ,
" he flared up dreadfully - and just think of the fellow 's audacity , lying , and obstinacy ! "
" And the count wanted him to say it was from Klyuchar"ev ?
I understand ! " said Pierre .
" Not at all , " rejoined the adjutant in dismay . "
Klyuchar"ev had his own sins to answer for without that and that is why he has been banished .
But the point is that the count was much annoyed . '
How could you have written it yourself ? '
said he , and he took up the Hamburg Gazette that was lying on the table . '
Here it is !
You did not write it yourself but translated it , and translated it abominably , because you do n't even know French , you fool . '
And what do you think ? '
No , ' said he , ' I have not read any papers
, I made it up myself . ' '
If that 's so , you 're a traitor
and I 'll have you tried , and you 'll be hanged !
Say from whom you had it . ' '
I have seen no papers , I made it up myself . '
And that was the end of it .
The count had the father fetched , but the fellow stuck to it .
He was sent for trial and condemned to hard labor , I believe .
Now the father has come to intercede for him .
But he 's a good - for - nothing lad !
You know that sort of tradesman 's son , a dandy and lady - killer .
He attended some lectures somewhere and imagines that the devil is no match for him .
That 's the sort of fellow he is .
His father keeps a cookshop here by the Stone Bridge , and you know there was a large icon of God Almighty painted with a scepter in one hand and an orb in the other .
Well , he took that icon home with him for a few days and what did he do ?
He found some scoundrel of a painter ... "
CHAPTER XI
In the middle of this fresh tale Pierre was summoned to the commander in chief .
When he entered the private room Count Rostopch'in , puckering his face , was rubbing his forehead and eyes with his hand .
A short man was saying something , but when Pierre entered he stopped speaking and went out .
" Ah , how do you do , great warrior ? " said Rostopch'in as soon as the short man had left the room .
" We have heard of your prowess .
But that 's not the point .
Between ourselves , mon cher , do you belong to the Masons ?
" he went on severely , as though there were something wrong about it which he nevertheless intended to pardon .
Pierre remained silent .
" I am well informed , my friend , but I am aware that there are Masons and I hope that you are not one of those who on pretense of saving mankind wish to ruin Russia . "
" Yes , I am a Mason , " Pierre replied .
" There , you see , mon cher !
I expect you know that Messrs. Sper'anski and Magn'itski have been deported to their proper place .
Mr. Klyuchar"ev has been treated in the same way , and so have others who on the plea of building up the temple of Solomon have tried to destroy the temple of their fatherland .
You can understand that there are reasons for this and that I could not have exiled the Postmaster had he not been a harmful person .
It has now come to my knowledge that you lent him your carriage for his removal from town , and that you have even accepted papers from him for safe custody .
I like you and do n't wish you any harm and -
as you are only half my age - I advise you , as a father would , to cease all communication with men of that stamp and to leave here as soon as possible . "
" But what did Klyuchar"ev do wrong , Count ? " asked Pierre .
" That is for me to know , but not for you to ask , " shouted Rostopch'in .
" If he is accused of circulating Napoleon 's proclamation it is not proved that he did so , " said Pierre without looking at Rostopch'in , " and Vereshch'agin ... "
" There we are ! "
Rostopch'in shouted at Pierre louder than before , frowning suddenly . "
Vereshch'agin is a renegade and a traitor who will be punished as he deserves , " said he with the vindictive heat with which people speak when recalling an insult . "
But I did not summon you to discuss my actions , but to give you advice - or an order if you prefer it .
I beg you to leave the town and break off all communication with such men as Klyuchar"ev .
My head is sometimes in a whirl .
Well , mon cher , what are you doing personally ? "
" Why , nothing , " answered Pierre without raising his eyes or changing the thoughtful expression of his face .
The count frowned .
" A word of friendly advice , mon cher .
Be off as soon as you can , that 's all I have to tell you .
Happy he who has ears to hear .
Good - by , my dear fellow .
Oh , by the by ! "
he shouted through the doorway after Pierre , " is it true that the countess has fallen into the clutches of the holy fathers of the Society of Jesus ? "
Pierre did not answer and left Rostopch'in 's room more sullen and angry than he had ever before shown himself .
When he reached home it was already getting dark .
Some eight people had come to see him that evening : the secretary of a committee , the colonel of his battalion , his steward , his major - domo , and various petitioners .
They all had business with Pierre and wanted decisions from him .
Pierre did not understand and was not interested in any of these questions and only answered them in order to get rid of these people .
When left alone at last he opened and read his wife 's letter .
" They , the soldiers at the battery , Prince Andrew killed ... that old man ...
Simplicity is submission to God .
Suffering is necessary ... the meaning of all ... one must harness ...
my wife is getting married ...
One must forget and understand ... " And going to his bed he threw himself on it without undressing and immediately fell asleep .
When he awoke next morning the major - domo came to inform him that a special messenger , a police officer , had come from Count Rostopch'in to know whether Count Bez'ukhov had left or was leaving the town .
A dozen persons who had business with Pierre were awaiting him in the drawing room .
Pierre dressed hurriedly and , instead of going to see them , went to the back porch and out through the gate .
From that time till the end of the destruction of Moscow no one of Bez'ukhov 's household , despite all the search they made , saw Pierre again or knew where he was .
CHAPTER XII
The Rost'ovs remained in Moscow till the first of September , that is , till the eve of the enemy 's entry into the city .
After P'etya had joined Obol'enski 's regiment of Cossacks and left for B'elaya Ts'erkov where that regiment was forming , the countess was seized with terror .
She tried to get Nicholas back and wished to go herself to join P'etya , or to get him an appointment somewhere in Petersburg , but neither of these proved possible .
P'etya could not return unless his regiment did so or unless he was transferred to another regiment on active service .
Nicholas was somewhere with the army and had not sent a word since his last letter , in which he had given a detailed account of his meeting with Princess Mary .
The countess did not sleep at night , or when she did fall asleep dreamed that she saw her sons lying dead .
After many consultations and conversations , the count at last devised means to tranquillize her .
He got P'etya transferred from Obol'enski 's regiment to Bez'ukhov 's , which was in training near Moscow .
The nearer the time came for P'etya to return , the more uneasy grew the countess .
She began to think she would never live to see such happiness .
The presence of S'onya , of her beloved Nat'asha , or even of her husband irritated her .
" What do I want with them ?
I want no one but P'etya , " she thought .
At the end of August the Rost'ovs received another letter from Nicholas .
He wrote from the province of Vor'onezh where he had been sent to procure remounts , but that letter did not set the countess at ease .
Knowing that one son was out of danger she became the more anxious about P'etya .
On the twenty - eighth of August he arrived .
The passionate tenderness with which his mother received him did not please the sixteen - year - old officer .
From the twenty - eighth till the thirty - first all Moscow was in a bustle and commotion .
Every day thousands of men wounded at Borodin'o were brought in by the Dorogom'ilov gate and taken to various parts of Moscow , and thousands of carts conveyed the inhabitants and their possessions out by the other gates .
In spite of Rostopch'in 's broadsheets , or because of them or independently of them , the strangest and most contradictory rumors were current in the town .
Some said that no one was to be allowed to leave the city , others on the contrary said that all the icons had been taken out of the churches and everybody was to be ordered to leave .
Some said there had been another battle after Borodin'o at which the French had been routed , while others on the contrary reported that the Russian army had been destroyed .
It was felt that everything would suddenly break up and change , but up to the first of September nothing had done so .
During the three days preceding the occupation of Moscow the whole Rost'ov family was absorbed in various activities .
The head of the family , Count Ily'a Rost'ov , continually drove about the city collecting the current rumors from all sides and gave superficial and hasty orders at home about the preparations for their departure .
The countess watched the things being packed , was dissatisfied with everything , was constantly in pursuit of P'etya who was always running away from her , and was jealous of Nat'asha with whom he spent all his time .
S'onya alone directed the practical side of matters by getting things packed .
But of late S'onya had been particularly sad and silent .
Nicholas ' letter in which he mentioned Princess Mary had elicited , in her presence , joyous comments from the countess , who saw an intervention of Providence in this meeting of the princess and Nicholas .
" I was never pleased at Bolk'onski 's engagement to Nat'asha , " said the countess , " but I always wanted Nicholas to marry the princess , and had a presentiment that it would happen .
What a good thing it would be ! "
S'onya felt that this was true : that the only possibility of retrieving the Rost'ovs ' affairs was by Nicholas marrying a rich woman , and that the princess was a good match .
It was very bitter for her .
But despite her grief , or perhaps just because of it , she took on herself all the difficult work of directing the storing and packing of their things and was busy for whole days .
The count and countess turned to her when they had any orders to give .
P'etya and Nat'asha on the contrary , far from helping their parents , were generally a nuisance and a hindrance to everyone .
Almost all day long the house resounded with their running feet , their cries , and their spontaneous laughter .
They laughed and were gay not because there was any reason to laugh , but because gaiety and mirth were in their hearts and so everything that happened was a cause for gaiety and laughter to them .
P'etya was in high spirits because having left home a boy he had returned ( as everybody told him ) a fine young man , because he was at home , because he had left B'elaya
Nat'asha was gay because she had been sad too long and now nothing reminded her of the cause of her sadness , and because she was feeling well .
She was also happy because she had someone to adore her : the adoration of others was a lubricant the wheels of her machine needed to make them run freely - and P'etya adored her .
CHAPTER XIII
On Saturday , the thirty - first of August , everything in the Rost'ovs ' house seemed topsy - turvy .
All the doors were open , all the furniture was being carried out or moved about , and the mirrors and pictures had been taken down .
There were trunks in the rooms , and hay , wrapping paper , and ropes were scattered about .
The peasants and house serfs carrying out the things were treading heavily on the parquet floors .
The yard was crowded with peasant carts , some loaded high and already corded up , others still empty .
The voices and footsteps of the many servants and of the peasants who had come with the carts resounded as they shouted to one another in the yard and in the house .
The count had been out since morning .
The countess had a headache brought on by all the noise and turmoil and was lying down in the new sitting room with a vinegar compress on her head .
P'etya was not at home , he had gone to visit a friend with whom he meant to obtain a transfer from the militia to the active army .
S'onya was in the ballroom looking after the packing of the glass and china .
For a while she had stood beside S'onya while the china was being packed and tried to help , but soon gave it up and went to her room to pack her own things .
At first she found it amusing to give away dresses and ribbons to the maids , but when that was done and what was left had still to be packed , she found it dull .
" Duny'asha , you pack !
You will , wo n't you , dear ? "
She was roused from her reverie by the talk of the maids in the next room ( which was theirs ) and by the sound of their hurried footsteps going to the back porch .
Nat'asha got up and looked out of the window .
An enormously long row of carts full of wounded men had stopped in the street .
The housekeeper , the old nurse , the cooks , coachmen , maids , footmen , postilions , and scullions stood at the gate , staring at the wounded .
Nat'asha , throwing a clean pocket handkerchief over her hair and holding an end of it in each hand , went out into the street .
Nat'asha moved a few steps forward and stopped shyly , still holding her handkerchief , and listened to what the housekeeper was saying .
" Then you have nobody in Moscow ? " she was saying .
" You would be more comfortable somewhere in a house ... in ours , for instance ... the family are leaving . "
" I do n't know if it would be allowed , " replied the officer in a weak voice . "
Here is our commanding officer ... ask him , " and he pointed to a stout major who was walking back along the street past the row of carts .
Nat'asha glanced with frightened eyes at the face of the wounded officer and at once went to meet the major .
" May the wounded men stay in our house ? " she asked .
The major raised his hand to his cap with a smile .
" Which one do you want , Ma'am'selle ? " said he , screwing up his eyes and smiling .
" Oh yes , why not ?
They may , " he said .
With a slight inclination of her head , Nat'asha stepped back quickly to M'avra Kuzm'inichna , who stood talking compassionately to the officer .
" They may .
He says they may ! "
whispered Nat'asha .
Nat'asha was evidently pleased to be dealing with new people outside the ordinary routine of her life .
She and M'avra Kuzm'inichna tried to get as many of the wounded as possible into their yard .
" Your Papa must be told , though , " said M'avra Kuzm'inichna .
" Never mind , never mind , what does it matter ?
For one day we can move into the drawing room .
They can have all our half of the house . "
" There now , young lady , you do take things into your head !
Even if we put them into the wing , the men 's room , or the nurse 's room , we must ask permission . "
" Well , I 'll ask . "
Nat'asha ran into the house and went on tiptoe through the half - open door into the sitting room , where there was a smell of vinegar and Hoffman 's drops .
" Are you asleep , Mamma ? "
" Oh , what sleep- ? " said the countess , waking up just as she was dropping into a doze .
" Mamma darling ! " said Nat'asha , kneeling by her mother and bringing her face close to her mother 's , " I am sorry , forgive me ,
I 'll never do it again ; I woke you up !
M'avra Kuzm'inichna has sent me : they have brought some wounded here - officers .
Will you let them come ?
They have nowhere to go .
I knew you 'd let them come ! "
she said quickly all in one breath .
" What officers ?
Whom have they brought ?
I do n't understand anything about it , " said the countess .
Nat'asha laughed , and the countess too smiled slightly .
" I knew you 'd give permission ... so I 'll tell them , " and , having kissed her mother , Nat'asha got up and went to the door .
In the hall she met her father , who had returned with bad news .
" We 've stayed too long ! " said the count with involuntary vexation .
" The Club is closed and the police are leaving . "
" Papa , is it all right - I've invited some of the wounded into the house ? " said Nat'asha .
" Of course it is , " he answered absently .
" That 's not the point .
I beg you not to indulge in trifles now , but to help to pack , and tomorrow we must go , go , go ! ... "
And the count gave a similar order to the major - domo and the servants .
At dinner P'etya having returned home told them the news he had heard .
The countess looked with timid horror at her son 's eager , excited face as he said this .
She realized that if she said a word about his not going to the battle ( she knew he enjoyed the thought of the impending engagement )
With a woman 's involuntary loving cunning she , who till then had not shown any alarm , said that she would die of fright if they did not leave that very night .
Without any pretense she was now afraid of everything .
CHAPTER XIV
Madame Schoss , who had been out to visit her daughter , increased the countess ' fears still more by telling what she had seen at a spirit dealer 's in Myasn'itski Street .
When returning by that street she had been unable to pass because of a drunken crowd rioting in front of the shop .
She had taken a cab and driven home by a side street and the cabman had told her that the people were breaking open the barrels at the drink store , having received orders to do so .
After dinner the whole Rost'ov household set to work with enthusiastic haste packing their belongings and preparing for their departure .
The old count , suddenly setting to work , kept passing from the yard to the house and back again , shouting confused instructions to the hurrying people , and flurrying them still more .
P'etya directed things in the yard .
S'onya , owing to the count 's contradictory orders , lost her head and did not know what to do .
The servants ran noisily about the house and yard , shouting and disputing .
Nat'asha , with the ardor characteristic of all she did suddenly set to work too .
At first her intervention in the business of packing was received skeptically .
Her first exploit , which cost her immense effort and established her authority , was the packing of the carpets .
The count had valuable Gobelin tapestries and Persian carpets in the house .
When Nat'asha set to work two cases were standing open in the ballroom , one almost full up with crockery , the other with carpets .
There was also much china standing on the tables , and still more was being brought in from the storeroom .
A third case was needed and servants had gone to fetch it .
" S'onya , wait a bit - we'll pack everything into these , " said Nat'asha .
" You ca n't , Miss , we have tried to , " said the butler 's assistant .
" No , wait a minute , please . "
And Nat'asha began rapidly taking out of the case dishes and plates wrapped in paper .
" The dishes must go in here among the carpets , " said she .
" Why , it 's a mercy if we can get the carpets alone into three cases , " said the butler 's assistant .
" Oh , wait , please ! "
And Nat'asha began rapidly and deftly sorting out the things .
" These are n't needed , " said she , putting aside some plates of Kiev ware .
" These - yes , these must go among the carpets , " she said , referring to the Saxony china dishes .
" Do n't , Nat'asha !
Leave it alone !
We 'll get it all packed , " urged S'onya reproachfully .
" What a young lady she is ! " remarked the major - domo .
But Nat'asha would not give in .
She turned everything out and began quickly repacking , deciding that the inferior Russian carpets and unnecessary crockery should not be taken at all .
Only the lid of the case containing the carpets would not shut down .
A few more things might have been taken out , but Nat'asha insisted on having her own way .
She packed , repacked , pressed , made the butler 's assistant and P'etya - whom she had drawn into the business of packing - press on the lid , and made desperate efforts herself .
" That 's enough , Nat'asha , " said S'onya .
" I see you were right , but just take out the top one . "
" I wo n't ! " cried Nat'asha , with one hand holding back the hair that hung over her perspiring face , while with the other she pressed down the carpets . "
Now press , P'etya !
Press , Vas'ilich , press hard !
" she cried .
The carpets yielded and the lid closed ; Nat'asha , clapping her hands , screamed with delight and tears fell from her eyes .
But this only lasted a moment .
She at once set to work afresh and they now trusted her completely .
Thanks to Nat'asha 's directions the work now went on expeditiously , unnecessary things were left , and the most valuable packed as compactly as possible .
But hard as they all worked till quite late that night , they could not get everything packed .
The countess had fallen asleep and the count , having put off their departure till next morning , went to bed .
S'onya and Nat'asha slept in the sitting room without undressing .
That night another wounded man was driven down the Povarsk'aya , and M'avra Kuzm'inichna , who was standing at the gate , had him brought into the Rost'ovs ' yard .
M'avra Kuzm'inichna concluded that he was a very important man .
He was being conveyed in a cal`eche with a raised hood , and was quite covered by an apron .
On the box beside the driver sat a venerable old attendant .
A doctor and two soldiers followed the carriage in a cart .
" Please come in here .
The masters are going away and the whole house will be empty , " said the old woman to the old attendant .
" Well , perhaps , " said he with a sigh .
" We do n't expect to get him home alive !
We have a house of our own in Moscow , but it 's a long way from here , and there 's nobody living in it . "
" Do us the honor to come in , there 's plenty of everything in the master 's house .
Come in , " said M'avra Kuzm'inichna .
" Is he very ill ? "
she asked .
The attendant made a hopeless gesture .
" We do n't expect to get him home !
We must ask the doctor . "
And the old servant got down from the box and went up to the cart .
" All right ! " said the doctor .
The old servant returned to the cal`eche , looked into it , shook his head disconsolately , told the driver to turn into the yard , and stopped beside M'avra Kuzm'inichna .
" O , Lord Jesus Christ !
" she murmured .
She invited them to take the wounded man into the house .
" The masters wo n't object ... " she said .
But they had to avoid carrying the man upstairs , and so they took him into the wing and put him in the room that had been Madame Schoss ' .
This wounded man was Prince Andrew Bolk'onski .
CHAPTER XV
Moscow 's last day had come .
It was a clear bright autumn day , a Sunday .
The church bells everywhere were ringing for service , just as usual on Sundays .
Nobody seemed yet to realize what awaited the city .
Only two things indicated the social condition of Moscow - the rabble , that is the poor people , and the price of commodities .
An enormous crowd of factory hands , house serfs , and peasants , with whom some officials , seminarists , and gentry were mingled , had gone early that morning to the Three Hills .
Having waited there for Rostopch'in who did not turn up , they became convinced that Moscow would be surrendered , and then dispersed all about the town to the public houses and cookshops .
Prices too that day indicated the state of affairs .
In the Rost'ovs ' staid old - fashioned house the dissolution of former conditions of life was but little noticeable .
The major - domo to whom these entreaties were addressed , though he was sorry for the wounded , resolutely refused , saying that he dare not even mention the matter to the count .
Pity these wounded men as one might , it was evident that if they were given one cart there would be no reason to refuse another , or all the carts and one 's own carriages as well .
Thirty carts could not save all the wounded and in the general catastrophe one could not disregard oneself and one 's own family .
So thought the major - domo on his master 's behalf .
In the yard stood the carts ready corded .
The carriages were at the front porch .
The major - domo stood at the porch talking to an elderly orderly and to a pale young officer with a bandaged arm .
On seeing the count the major - domo made a significant and stern gesture to them both to go away .
" Well , Vas'ilich , is everything ready ? " asked the count , and stroking his bald head he looked good - naturedly at the officer and the orderly and nodded to them .
( He liked to see new faces . )
" We can harness at once , your excellency . "
" Well , that 's right .
As soon as the countess wakes we 'll be off , God willing !
What is it , gentlemen ? "
he added , turning to the officer .
" Are you staying in my house ? "
The officer came nearer and suddenly his face flushed crimson .
" Count , be so good as to allow me ... for God 's sake , to get into some corner of one of your carts !
I have nothing here with me ....
I shall be all right on a loaded cart .... "
Before the officer had finished speaking the orderly made the same request on behalf of his master .
" Oh , yes , yes , yes ! " said the count hastily .
" I shall be very pleased , very pleased .
Vas'ilich , you 'll see to it .
Just unload one or two carts .
Well , what of it ... do what 's necessary ... " said the count , muttering some indefinite order .
But at the same moment an expression of warm gratitude on the officer 's face had already sealed the order .
The count looked around him .
In the yard , at the gates , at the window of the wings , wounded officers and their orderlies were to be seen .
They were all looking at the count and moving toward the porch .
" Please step into the gallery , your excellency , " said the major - domo .
" What are your orders about the pictures ? "
The count went into the house with him , repeating his order not to refuse the wounded who asked for a lift .
" Well , never mind , some of the things can be unloaded , " he added in a soft , confidential voice , as though afraid of being overheard .
The countess sent for her husband .
" What is this , my dear ?
I hear that the luggage is being unloaded . "
" You know , love , I wanted to tell you ...
Countess dear
... an officer came to me to ask for a few carts for the wounded .
After all , ours are things that can be bought but think what being left behind means to them ! ...
Really now , in our own yard - we asked them in ourselves and there are officers among them ....
You know , I think , my dear
... let them be taken ...
where 's the hurry ? "
The count spoke timidly , as he always did when talking of money matters .
She was accustomed always to oppose anything announced in that timid tone and considered it her duty to do so .
You said yourself that we have a hundred thousand rubles ' worth of things in the house .
I do n't consent , my dear , I do n't !
Do as you please !
It 's the government 's business to look after the wounded ; they know that .
Look at the Lopukh'ins opposite , they cleared out everything two days ago .
That 's what other people do .
It 's only we who are such fools .
If you have no pity on me , have some for the children . "
Flourishing his arms in despair the count left the room without replying .
" Papa , what are you doing that for ? " asked Nat'asha , who had followed him into her mother 's room .
" Nothing !
What business is it of yours ? "
muttered the count angrily .
" But I heard , " said Nat'asha .
" Why does Mamma object ? "
" What business is it of yours ? " cried the count .
Nat'asha stepped up to the window and pondered .
" Papa !
Here 's Berg coming to see us , " said she , looking out of the window .
CHAPTER XVI
On the first of September he had come to Moscow from the army .
He had nothing to do in Moscow , but he had noticed that everyone in the army was asking for leave to visit Moscow and had something to do there .
So he considered it necessary to ask for leave of absence for family and domestic reasons .
Berg drove up to his father - in - law 's house in his spruce little trap with a pair of sleek roans , exactly like those of a certain prince .
He looked attentively at the carts in the yard and while going up to the porch took out a clean pocket handkerchief and tied a knot in it .
From the anteroom Berg ran with smooth though impatient steps into the drawing room , where he embraced the count , kissed the hands of Nat'asha and S'onya , and hastened to inquire after " Mamma 's " health .
" Health , at a time like this ? " said the count .
" Come , tell us the news !
Is the army retreating or will there be another battle ? "
" God Almighty alone can decide the fate of our fatherland , Papa , " said Berg .
" The army is burning with a spirit of heroism and the leaders , so to say , have now assembled in council .
No one knows what is coming .
General Barclay de Tolly risked his life everywhere at the head of the troops , I can assure you .
Our corps was stationed on a hillside .
You can imagine ! "
And Berg related all that he remembered of the various tales he had heard those days .
Nat'asha watched him with an intent gaze that confused him , as if she were trying to find in his face the answer to some question .
" ' Russia is not in Moscow , she lives in the hearts of her sons ! '
Is n't it so ,
Papa ? " said he .
Just then the countess came in from the sitting room with a weary and dissatisfied expression .
Berg hurriedly jumped up , kissed her hand , asked about her health , and , swaying his head from side to side to express sympathy , remained standing beside her .
" Yes , Mamma , I tell you sincerely that these are hard and sad times for every Russian .
But why are you so anxious ?
You have still time to get away .... "
" I ca n't think what the servants are about , " said the countess , turning to her husband .
" I have just been told that nothing is ready yet .
Somebody after all must see to things .
One misses M'itenka at such times .
There wo n't be any end to it . "
The count was about to say something , but evidently restrained himself .
He got up from his chair and went to the door .
At that moment Berg drew out his handkerchief as if to blow his nose and , seeing the knot in it , pondered , shaking his head sadly and significantly .
" And I have a great favor to ask of you ,
Papa , " said he .
" Hm ... " said the count , and stopped .
" I was driving past Yus'upov 's house just now , " said Berg with a laugh , " when the steward , a man I know , ran out and asked me whether I would n't buy something .
I went in out of curiosity , you know , and there is a small chiffonier and a dressing table .
You know how dear V'era wanted a chiffonier like that and how we had a dispute about it . "
( At the mention of the chiffonier and dressing table Berg involuntarily changed his tone to one of pleasure at his admirable domestic arrangements . )
" And it 's such a beauty !
It pulls out and has a secret English drawer , you know !
And dear V'era has long wanted one .
I wish to give her a surprise , you see .
I saw so many of those peasant carts in your yard .
Please let me have one , I will pay the man well , and ... "
The count frowned and coughed .
" Ask the countess , I do n't give orders . "
" If it 's inconvenient , please do n't , " said Berg .
" Only I so wanted it , for dear V'era 's sake . "
" Oh , go to the devil , all of you !
To the devil , the devil , the devil ... " cried the old count .
" My head 's in a whirl ! "
And he left the room .
The countess began to cry .
" Yes , Mamma !
Yes , these are very hard times ! " said Berg .
Nat'asha left the room with her father and , as if finding it difficult to reach some decision , first followed him and then ran downstairs .
P'etya was in the porch , engaged in giving out weapons to the servants who were to leave Moscow .
The loaded carts were still standing in the yard .
Two of them had been uncorded and a wounded officer was climbing into one of them helped by an orderly .
" Do you know what it 's about ? "
P'etya asked Nat'asha .
She understood that he meant what were their parents quarreling about .
She did not answer .
" It 's because Papa wanted to give up all the carts to the wounded , " said P'etya .
" Vas'ilich told me .
I consider ... "
" I consider , " Nat'asha suddenly almost shouted , turning her angry face to P'etya , " I consider it so horrid , so abominable ,
so ...
I do n't know what .
Are we despicable Germans ? "
Her throat quivered with convulsive sobs and , afraid of weakening and letting the force of her anger run to waste , she turned and rushed headlong up the stairs .
Berg was sitting beside the countess consoling her with the respectful attention of a relative .
The count , pipe in hand , was pacing up and down the room , when Nat'asha , her face distorted by anger , burst in like a tempest and approached her mother with rapid steps .
" It 's horrid !
It 's abominable !
" she screamed .
" You ca n't possibly have ordered it ! "
Berg and the countess looked at her , perplexed and frightened .
The count stood still at the window and listened .
" Mamma , it 's impossible : see what is going on in the yard ! " she cried .
" They will be left ! ... "
" What 's the matter with you ?
Who are ' they ' ?
What do you want ? "
" Why , the wounded !
It 's impossible , Mamma .
It 's monstrous ! ...
No , Mamma darling , it 's not the thing .
Please forgive me , darling ....
Mamma , what does it matter what we take away ?
Only look what is going on in the yard ...
Mamma ! ...
It 's impossible ! "
The count stood by the window and listened without turning round .
Suddenly he sniffed and put his face closer to the window .
" Oh , do as you like !
Am I hindering anyone ?
" she said , not surrendering at once .
" Mamma , darling , forgive me ! "
But the countess pushed her daughter away and went up to her husband .
" My dear , you order what is right ....
You know I do n't understand about it , " said she , dropping her eyes shamefacedly .
" The eggs ... the eggs are teaching the hen , " muttered the count through tears of joy , and he embraced his wife who was glad to hide her look of shame on his breast .
" Papa !
Mamma !
May I see to it ?
May I ?
... " asked Nat'asha .
" We will still take all the most necessary things . "
The count nodded affirmatively , and Nat'asha , at the rapid pace at which she used to run when playing at tag , ran through the ballroom to the anteroom and downstairs into the yard .
When they understood that order the servants set to work at this new task with pleasure and zeal .
The whole household , as if to atone for not having done it sooner , set eagerly to work at the new task of placing the wounded in the carts .
The wounded dragged themselves out of their rooms and stood with pale but happy faces round the carts .
The news that carts were to be had spread to the neighboring houses , from which wounded men began to come into the Rost'ovs ' yard .
Many of the wounded asked them not to unload the carts but only to let them sit on the top of the things .
But the work of unloading , once started , could not be arrested .
It seemed not to matter whether all or only half the things were left behind .
" We can take four more men , " said the steward .
" They can have my trap , or else what is to become of them ? "
" Let them have my wardrobe cart , " said the countess .
" Duny'asha can go with me in the carriage . "
They unloaded the wardrobe cart and sent it to take wounded men from a house two doors off .
The whole household , servants included , was bright and animated .
Nat'asha was in a state of rapturous excitement such as she had not known for a long time .
" What could we fasten this onto ? " asked the servants , trying to fix a trunk on the narrow footboard behind a carriage .
" We must keep at least one cart . "
" What 's in it ? " asked Nat'asha .
" The count 's books . "
" Leave it , Vas'ilich will put it away .
It 's not wanted . "
The phaeton was full of people and there was a doubt as to where Count Peter could sit .
" On the box .
You 'll sit on the box , wo n't you , P'etya ? " cried Nat'asha .
S'onya too was busy all this time , but the aim of her efforts was quite different from Nat'asha 's .
She was putting away the things that had to be left behind and making a list of them as the countess wished , and she tried to get as much taken away with them as possible .
CHAPTER XVII
Before two o'clock in the afternoon the Rost'ovs ' four carriages , packed full and with the horses harnessed , stood at the front door .
One by one the carts with the wounded had moved out of the yard .
The cal`eche in which Prince Andrew was being taken attracted S'onya 's attention as it passed the front porch .
With the help of a maid she was arranging a seat for the countess in the huge high coach that stood at the entrance .
" Whose cal`eche is that ? " she inquired , leaning out of the carriage window .
" Why , did n't you know , Miss ? " replied the maid .
"
The wounded prince : he spent the night in our house and is going with us . "
" But who is it ?
What 's his name ? "
" It 's our intended that was - Prince Bolk'onski himself !
They say he is dying , " replied the maid with a sigh .
S'onya jumped out of the coach and ran to the countess .
Nat'asha was not in the room .
" Mamma , " said S'onya , " Prince Andrew is here , mortally wounded .
He is going with us . "
The countess opened her eyes in dismay and , seizing S'onya 's arm , glanced around .
" Nat'asha ? " she murmured .
At that moment this news had only one significance for both of them .
They knew their Nat'asha , and alarm as to what would happen if she heard this news stifled all sympathy for the man they both liked .
" Nat'asha does not know yet , but he is going with us , " said S'onya .
" You say he is dying ? "
S'onya nodded .
The countess put her arms around S'onya and began to cry .
" The ways of God are past finding out !
" she thought , feeling that the Almighty Hand , hitherto unseen , was becoming manifest in all that was now taking place .
" Well , Mamma ?
Everything is ready .
What 's the matter
? " asked Nat'asha , as with animated face she ran into the room .
" Nothing , " answered the countess .
" If everything is ready let us start . "
And the countess bent over her reticule to hide her agitated face .
S'onya embraced Nat'asha and kissed her .
Nat'asha looked at her inquiringly .
" What is it ?
What has happened ? "
" Nothing ... No ... "
" Is it something very bad for me ?
What is it ? "
persisted Nat'asha with her quick intuition .
S'onya sighed and made no reply .
The count was the first to rise , and with a loud sigh crossed himself before the icon .
All the others did the same .
Then the count embraced M'avra Kuzm'inichna and Vas'ilich , who were to remain in Moscow , and while they caught at his hand and kissed his shoulder he patted their backs lightly with some vaguely affectionate and comforting words .
The countess went into the oratory and there S'onya found her on her knees before the icons that had been left here and there hanging on the wall .
( The most precious ones , with which some family tradition was connected , were being taken with them . )
In the porch and in the yard the men whom P'etya had armed with swords and daggers , with trousers tucked inside their high boots and with belts and girdles tightened , were taking leave of those remaining behind .
" They always will forget everything ! " said the countess . "
Do n't you know I ca n't sit like that ? "
And Duny'asha , with clenched teeth , without replying but with an aggrieved look on her face , hastily got into the coach to rearrange the seat .
" Oh , those servants ! " said the count , swaying his head .
From thirty years ' experience he knew it would be some time yet before the order , " Be off , in God 's name ! "
He knew all this and therefore waited calmly for what would happen , with more patience than the horses , especially the near one , the chestnut Falcon , who was pawing the ground and champing his bit .
Then Ef'im deliberately doffed his hat and began crossing himself .
The postilion and all the other servants did the same . "
Off , in God 's name ! " said Ef'im , putting on his hat . "
Start ! "
The postilion started the horses , the off pole horse tugged at his collar , the high springs creaked , and the body of the coach swayed .
In the carriages , the cal`eche , and the phaeton , all crossed themselves as they passed the church opposite the house .
Those who were to remain in Moscow walked on either side of the vehicles seeing the travelers off .
Rarely had Nat'asha experienced so joyful a feeling as now , sitting in the carriage beside the countess and gazing at the slowly receding walls of forsaken , agitated Moscow .
Occasionally she leaned out of the carriage window and looked back and then forward at the long train of wounded in front of them .
Almost at the head of the line she could see the raised hood of Prince Andrew 's cal`eche .
She did not know who was in it , but each time she looked at the procession her eyes sought that cal`eche .
She knew it was right in front .
As they were going round the S'ukharev water tower
Nat'asha , who was inquisitively and alertly scrutinizing the people driving or walking past , suddenly cried out in joyful surprise :
" Dear me !
Mamma , S'onya , look , it 's he ! "
" Who ?
Who ? "
" Look !
Yes , on my word , it 's Bez'ukhov ! "
" Yes , it really is Bez'ukhov in a coachman 's coat , with a queer - looking old boy .
Really , " said Nat'asha , " look , look ! "
" No , it 's not he .
How can you talk such nonsense ? "
" Mamma , " screamed Nat'asha , " I 'll stake my head it 's he !
I assure you !
Stop , stop ! "
she cried to the coachman .
But the coachman could not stop , for from the Meshch'anski Street came more carts and carriages , and the Rost'ovs were being shouted at to move on and not block the way .
That old man noticed a face thrust out of the carriage window gazing at them , and respectfully touching Pierre 's elbow said something to him and pointed to the carriage .
Pierre , evidently engrossed in thought , could not at first understand him .
At length when he had understood and looked in the direction the old man indicated , he recognized Nat'asha , and following his first impulse stepped instantly and rapidly toward the coach .
But having taken a dozen steps he seemed to remember something and stopped .
Nat'asha 's face , leaning out of the window , beamed with quizzical kindliness .
" Peter Kir'ilovich , come here !
We have recognized you !
This is wonderful ! "
she cried , holding out her hand to him . "
What are you doing ?
Why are you like this ? "
Pierre took her outstretched hand and kissed it awkwardly as he walked along beside her while the coach still moved on .
" What is the matter , Count ? " asked the countess in a surprised and commiserating tone .
" What ?
What ?
Why ?
Do n't ask me , " said Pierre , and looked round at Nat'asha whose radiant , happy expression - of which he was conscious without looking at her - filled him with enchantment .
" Are you remaining in Moscow , then ? "
Pierre hesitated .
" In Moscow ? " he said in a questioning tone . "
Yes , in Moscow .
Good - by ! "
" Ah , if only I were a man !
I 'd certainly stay with you .
How splendid ! " said Nat'asha . "
Mamma , if you 'll let me , I 'll stay ! "
Pierre glanced absently at Nat'asha and was about to say something , but the countess interrupted him .
" You were at the battle , we heard . "
" Yes , I was , " Pierre answered .
" There will be another battle tomorrow ...
" he began , but Nat'asha interrupted him .
" But what is the matter with you , Count ?
You are not like yourself .... "
" Oh , do n't ask me , do n't ask me !
I do n't know myself .
Tomorrow ...
But no !
Good - by , good - by ! "
he muttered .
" It 's an awful time ! " and dropping behind the carriage he stepped onto the pavement .
Nat'asha continued to lean out of the window for a long time , beaming at him with her kindly , slightly quizzical , happy smile .
CHAPTER XVIII
For the last two days , ever since leaving home , Pierre had been living in the empty house of his deceased benefactor , Bazd'eev .
This is how it happened .
When he woke up on the morning after his return to Moscow and his interview with Count Rostopch'in , he could not for some time make out where he was and what was expected of him .
He felt that everything was now at an end , all was in confusion and crumbling to pieces , that nobody was right or wrong , the future held nothing , and there was no escape from this position .
" Oh , yes , in a minute ; wait ... or no !
No , of course ... go and say I will come directly
, " Pierre replied to the major - domo .
But as soon as the man had left the room Pierre took up his hat which was lying on the table and went out of his study by the other door .
There was no one in the passage .
He went along the whole length of this passage to the stairs and , frowning and rubbing his forehead with both hands , went down as far as the first landing .
The hall porter was standing at the front door .
From the landing where Pierre stood there was a second staircase leading to the back entrance .
He went down that staircase and out into the yard .
No one had seen him .
But there were some carriages waiting , and as soon as Pierre stepped out of the gate the coachmen and the yard porter noticed him and raised their caps to him .
When he felt he was being looked at he behaved like an ostrich which hides its head in a bush in order not to be seen : he hung his head and quickening his pace went down the street .
Of all the affairs awaiting Pierre that day the sorting of Joseph Bazd'eev 's books and papers appeared to him the most necessary .
He hired the first cab he met and told the driver to go to the Patriarch 's Ponds , where the widow Bazd'eev 's house was .
The man told him that arms were being distributed today at the Kr'emlin and that tomorrow everyone would be sent out beyond the Three Hills gates and a great battle would be fought there .
Having reached the Patriarch 's Ponds Pierre found the Bazd'eevs ' house , where he had not been for a long time past .
He went up to the gate .
Ger'asim , that sallow beardless old man Pierre had seen at Torzh'ok five years before with Joseph Bazd'eev , came out in answer to his knock .
" At home ? " asked Pierre .
" Owing to the present state of things
Sophia Dan'ilovna has gone to the Torzh'ok estate with the children , your excellency . "
" I will come in all the same , I have to look through the books , " said Pierre .
" Be so good as to step in .
Mak'ar
Alex'eevich , the brother of my late master - may the kingdom of heaven be his - has remained here , but he is in a weak state as you know , " said the old servant .
Pierre knew that Mak'ar Alex'eevich was Joseph Bazd'eev 's half - insane brother and a hard drinker .
" Yes , yes , I know .
Let us go in ... " said Pierre and entered the house .
A tall , bald - headed old man with a red nose , wearing a dressing gown and with galoshes on his bare feet , stood in the anteroom .
On seeing Pierre he muttered something angrily and went away along the passage .
" He was a very clever man but has now grown quite feeble , as your honor sees , " said Ger'asim .
" Will you step into the study ? "
Pierre nodded .
" As it was sealed up so it has remained , but Sophia Dan'ilovna gave orders that if anyone should come from you they were to have the books . "
Pierre went into that gloomy study which he had entered with such trepidation in his benefactor 's lifetime .
The room , dusty and untouched since the death of Joseph Bazd'eev was now even gloomier .
Ger'asim opened one of the shutters and left the room on tiptoe .
Pierre went round the study , approached the cupboard in which the manuscripts were kept , and took out what had once been one of the most important , the holy of holies of the order .
This was the authentic Scotch Acts with Bazd'eev 's notes and explanations .
Ger'asim looked cautiously into the study several times and saw Pierre always sitting in the same attitude .
More than two hours passed and Ger'asim took the liberty of making a slight noise at the door to attract his attention , but Pierre did not hear him .
" Is the cabman to be discharged , your honor ? "
" Oh yes ! " said Pierre , rousing himself and rising hurriedly . "
" We heard so , " replied the man .
" I beg you not to tell anyone who I am , and to do what I ask you . "
" Yes , your excellency , " replied Ger'asim . "
Will you have something to eat ? "
" No , but I want something else .
I want peasant clothes and a pistol , " said Pierre , unexpectedly blushing .
" Yes , your excellency , " said Ger'asim after thinking for a moment .
All the rest of that day Pierre spent alone in his benefactor 's study , and Ger'asim heard him pacing restlessly from one corner to another and talking to himself .
And he spent the night on a bed made up for him there .
Ger'asim , being a servant who in his time had seen many strange things , accepted Pierre 's taking up his residence in the house without surprise , and seemed pleased to have someone to wait on .
That same evening - without even asking himself what they were wanted for - he procured a coachman 's coat and cap for Pierre , and promised to get him the pistol next day .
Mak'ar
Alex'eevich came twice that evening shuffling along in his galoshes as far as the door and stopped and looked ingratiatingly at Pierre .
But as soon as Pierre turned toward him he wrapped his dressing gown around him with a shamefaced and angry look and hurried away .
CHAPTER XIX
Kut'uzov 's order to retreat through Moscow to the Ryaz'an road was issued at night on the first of September .
The first troops started at once , and during the night they marched slowly and steadily without hurry .
They all rushed forward to the bridge , onto it , and to the fords and the boats .
Kut'uzov himself had driven round by side streets to the other side of Moscow .
By ten o'clock in the morning of the second of September , only the rear guard remained in the Dorogom'ilov suburb , where they had ample room .
The main army was on the other side of Moscow or beyond it .
At that very time , at ten in the morning of the second of September , Napoleon was standing among his troops on the Pokl'onny Hill looking at the panorama spread out before him .
At ten in the morning of the second of September this weather still held .
The brightness of the morning was magical .
Moscow seen from the Pokl'onny Hill lay spaciously spread out with her river , her gardens , and her churches , and she seemed to be living her usual life , her cupolas glittering like stars in the sunlight .
This city was evidently living with the full force of its own life .
Every Russian looking at Moscow feels her to be a mother ; every foreigner who sees her , even if ignorant of her significance as the mother city , must feel her feminine character , and Napoleon felt it .
" Cette ville asiatique aux innombrables ' eglises , Moscou la sainte .
La voil`a donc enfin , cette fameuse ville !
Il ' etait temps , " * said he , and dismounting he ordered a plan of Moscow to be spread out before him , and summoned Lelorgne d'Ideville , the interpreter .
* " That Asiatic city of the innumerable churches , holy Moscow !
Here it is then at last , that famous city .
It was high time . "
" A town captured by the enemy is like a maid who has lost her honor , " thought he ( he had said so to T'uchkov at Smol'ensk ) .
From that point of view he gazed at the Oriental beauty he had not seen before .
It seemed strange to him that his long - felt wish , which had seemed unattainable , had at last been realized .
In the clear morning light he gazed now at the city and now at the plan , considering its details , and the assurance of possessing it agitated and awed him .
" But could it be otherwise ? " he thought . "
Here is this capital at my feet .
Where is Alexander now , and of what is he thinking ?
A strange , beautiful , and majestic city ; and a strange and majestic moment !
In what light must I appear to them ! "
thought he , thinking of his troops . "
Here she is , the reward for all those fainthearted men , " he reflected , glancing at those near him and at the troops who were approaching and forming up . "
One word from me , one movement of my hand , and that ancient capital of the Tsars would perish .
But my clemency is always ready to descend upon the vanquished .
I must be magnanimous and truly great .
But no , it ca n't be true that I am in Moscow , " he suddenly thought . "
Yet here she is lying at my feet , with her golden domes and crosses scintillating and twinkling in the sunshine .
But I shall spare her .
On the ancient monuments of barbarism and despotism I will inscribe great words of justice and mercy ....
It is just this which Alexander will feel most painfully , I know him . "
( It seemed to Napoleon that the chief import of what was taking place lay in the personal struggle between himself and Alexander . )
I do not wish to utilize the fortunes of war to humiliate an honored monarch . '
Boyars , ' I will say to them , ' I do not desire war , I desire the peace and welfare of all my subjects . '
However , I know their presence will inspire me , and I shall speak to them as I always do : clearly , impressively , and majestically .
But can it be true that I am in Moscow ?
Yes , there she lies . "
" Qu'on m'am`ene les boyars , " * said he to his suite .
* " Bring the boyars to me . "
A general with a brilliant suite galloped off at once to fetch the boyars .
Two hours passed .
Napoleon had lunched and was again standing in the same place on the Pokl'onny Hill awaiting the deputation .
His speech to the boyars had already taken definite shape in his imagination .
That speech was full of dignity and greatness as Napoleon understood it .
He was himself carried away by the tone of magnanimity he intended to adopt toward Moscow .
In his imagination he appointed days for assemblies at the palace of the Tsars , at which Russian notables and his own would mingle .
He mentally appointed a governor , one who would win the hearts of the people .
Having learned that there were many charitable institutions in Moscow he mentally decided that he would shower favors on them all .
He thought that , as in Africa he had to put on a burnoose and sit in a mosque , so in Moscow he must be beneficent like the Tsars .
And in order finally to touch the hearts of the Russians - and being like all Frenchmen unable to imagine anything sentimental without a reference to ma ch`ere , ma tendre , ma pauvre m`ere * -he
decided that he would place an inscription on all these establishments in large letters : " This establishment is dedicated to my dear mother . "
Or no , it should be simply : Maison de ma M`ere ,
* ( 2 ) he concluded .
" But am I really in Moscow ?
Yes , here it lies before me , but why is the deputation from the city so long in appearing ?
" he wondered .
* " My dear , my tender , my poor mother . "
* ( 2 ) "
House of my Mother . "
Meanwhile an agitated consultation was being carried on in whispers among his generals and marshals at the rear of his suite .
Those sent to fetch the deputation had returned with the news that Moscow was empty , that everyone had left it .
The faces of those who were not conferring together were pale and perturbed .
Some said that a deputation of some sort must be scraped together , others disputed that opinion and maintained that the Emperor should first be carefully and skillfully prepared , and then told the truth .
" He will have to be told , all the same , " said some gentlemen of the suite .
"
But , gentlemen ... "
" But it 's impossible ... " declared the gentlemen of the suite , shrugging their shoulders but not venturing to utter the implied word - le ridicule ....
A single report of a signaling gun followed , and the troops , who were already spread out on different sides of Moscow , moved into the city through the Tver , Kal'uga , and Dorogom'ilov gates .
Faster and faster , vying with one another , they moved at the double or at a trot , vanishing amid the clouds of dust they raised and making the air ring with a deafening roar of mingling shouts .
CHAPTER XX
Meanwhile Moscow was empty .
There were still people in it , perhaps a fiftieth part of its former inhabitants had remained , but it was empty .
It was empty in the sense that a dying queenless hive is empty .
In a queenless hive no life is left though to a superficial glance it seems as much alive as other hives .
But one has only to observe that hive to realize that there is no longer any life in it .
The bees do not fly in the same way , the smell and the sound that meet the beekeeper are not the same .
From the alighting board , instead of the former spirituous fragrant smell of honey and venom , and the warm whiffs of crowded life , comes an odor of emptiness and decay mingling with the smell of honey .
There are no longer sentinels sounding the alarm with their abdomens raised , and ready to die in defense of the hive .
There is no longer the measured quiet sound of throbbing activity , like the sound of boiling water , but diverse discordant sounds of disorder .
In and out of the hive long black robber bees smeared with honey fly timidly and shiftily .
They do not sting , but crawl away from danger .
Formerly only bees laden with honey flew into the hive , and they flew out empty ; now they fly out laden .
The beekeeper opens the lower part of the hive and peers in .
The beekeeper opens the upper part of the hive and examines the super .
Instead of serried rows of bees sealing up every gap in the combs and keeping the brood warm , he sees the skillful complex structures of the combs , but no longer in their former state of purity .
All is neglected and foul .
Drones , bumblebees , wasps , and butterflies knock awkwardly against the walls of the hive in their flight .
Here and there among the cells containing dead brood and honey an angry buzzing can sometimes be heard .
Here and there a couple of bees , by force of habit and custom cleaning out the brood cells , with efforts beyond their strength laboriously drag away a dead bee or bumblebee without knowing why they do it .
In another corner two old bees are languidly fighting , or cleaning themselves , or feeding one another , without themselves knowing whether they do it with friendly or hostile intent .
The keeper opens the two center partitions to examine the brood cells .
In place of the former close dark circles formed by thousands of bees sitting back to back and guarding the high mystery of generation , he sees hundreds of dull , listless , and sleepy shells of bees .
They have almost all died unawares , sitting in the sanctuary they had guarded and which is now no more .
They reek of decay and death .
The beekeeper closes the hive , chalks a mark on it , and when he has time tears out its contents and burns it clean .
In various corners of Moscow there still remained a few people aimlessly moving about , following their old habits and hardly aware of what they were doing .
When with due circumspection Napoleon was informed that Moscow was empty , he looked angrily at his informant , turned away , and silently continued to walk to and fro .
" My carriage ! " he said .
He took his seat beside the aide - de - camp on duty and drove into the suburb . "
Moscow deserted ! "
he said to himself .
" What an incredible event ! "
He did not drive into the town , but put up at an inn in the Dorogom'ilov suburb .
The coup de th'e^atre had not come off .
CHAPTER XXI
The Russian troops were passing through Moscow from two o'clock at night till two in the afternoon and bore away with them the wounded and the last of the inhabitants who were leaving .
The greatest crush during the movement of the troops took place at the Stone , Moskv'a , and Ya'uza bridges .
Crowds of the kind seen at cheap sales filled all the passages and alleys of the Bazaar .
Tradesmen and their assistants ( of whom there were but few ) moved about among the soldiers quite bewildered .
They unlocked their shops and locked them up again , and themselves carried goods away with the help of their assistants .
On the square in front of the Bazaar were drummers beating the muster call .
But the roll of the drums did not make the looting soldiers run in the direction of the drum as formerly , but made them , on the contrary , run farther away .
Among the soldiers in the shops and passages some men were to be seen in gray coats , with closely shaven heads .
Two officers , one with a scarf over his uniform and mounted on a lean , dark - gray horse , the other in an overcoat and on foot , stood at the corner of Ily'inka Street , talking .
A third officer galloped up to them .
" The general orders them all to be driven out at once , without fail .
This is outrageous !
Half the men have dispersed . "
" Where are you off to ? ...
Where ? ... " he shouted to three infantrymen without muskets who , holding up the skirts of their overcoats , were slipping past him into the Bazaar passage . "
Stop , you rascals ! "
" But how are you going to stop them ? " replied another officer .
" There is no getting them together .
The army should push on before the rest bolt , that 's all ! "
" How can one push on ?
They are stuck there , wedged on the bridge , and do n't move .
Should n't we put a cordon round to prevent the rest from running away ? "
" Come , go in there and drive them out ! " shouted the senior officer .
The officer in the scarf dismounted , called up a drummer , and went with him into the arcade .
Some soldiers started running away in a group .
A shopkeeper with red pimples on his cheeks near the nose , and a calm , persistent , calculating expression on his plump face , hurriedly and ostentatiously approached the officer , swinging his arms .
" Your honor ! " said he .
" Be so good as to protect us !
We wo n't grudge trifles , you are welcome to anything - we shall be delighted !
Pray ! ...
I 'll fetch a piece of cloth at once for such an honorable gentleman , or even two pieces with pleasure .
For we feel how it is ; but what 's all this - sheer robbery !
If you please , could not guards be placed if only to let us close the shop .... "
Several shopkeepers crowded round the officer .
" Eh , what twaddle ! " said one of them , a thin , stern - looking man .
" When one 's head is gone one does n't weep for one 's hair !
Take what any of you like ! "
And flourishing his arm energetically he turned sideways to the officer .
" It 's all very well for you , Iv'an Sid'orych , to talk , " said the first tradesman angrily .
"
Please step inside , your honor ! "
" Talk indeed ! " cried the thin one .
" In my three shops here I have a hundred thousand rubles ' worth of goods .
Can they be saved when the army has gone ?
Eh , what people ! '
Against God 's might our hands ca n't fight . ' "
" Come inside , your honor ! " repeated the tradesman , bowing .
The officer stood perplexed and his face showed indecision .
" It 's not my business ! " he exclaimed , and strode on quickly down one of the passages .
From one open shop came the sound of blows and vituperation , and just as the officer came up to it a man in a gray coat with a shaven head was flung out violently .
This man , bent double , rushed past the tradesman and the officer .
The officer pounced on the soldiers who were in the shops , but at that moment fearful screams reached them from the huge crowd on the Moskv'a bridge and the officer ran out into the square .
" What is it ?
What is it ? "
he asked , but his comrade was already galloping off past Vas'ili
the Beatified in the direction from which the screams came .
The officer mounted his horse and rode after him .
When he reached the bridge he saw two unlimbered guns , the infantry crossing the bridge , several overturned carts , and frightened and laughing faces among the troops .
Beside the cannon a cart was standing to which two horses were harnessed .
Four borzois with collars were pressing close to the wheels .
The cart was loaded high , and at the very top , beside a child 's chair with its legs in the air , sat a peasant woman uttering piercing and desperate shrieks .
The crowd , crushing one another , upsetting carts , and shouting and squeezing desperately , had cleared off the bridge and the troops were now moving forward .
CHAPTER XXII
Meanwhile , the city itself was deserted .
There was hardly anyone in the streets .
The gates and shops were all closed , only here and there round the taverns solitary shouts or drunken songs could be heard .
Nobody drove through the streets and footsteps were rarely heard .
The Povarsk'aya was quite still and deserted .
The huge courtyard of the Rost'ovs ' house was littered with wisps of hay and with dung from the horses , and not a soul was to be seen there .
In the great drawing room of the house , which had been left with all it contained , were two people .
They were the yard porter Ign'at , and the page boy M'ishka , Vas'ilich 's grandson who had stayed in Moscow with his grandfather .
M'ishka had opened the clavichord and was strumming on it with one finger .
The yard porter , his arms akimbo , stood smiling with satisfaction before the large mirror .
" Is n't it fine , eh , Uncle Ign'at ? "
said the boy , suddenly beginning to strike the keyboard with both hands .
" Only fancy ! " answered Ign'at , surprised at the broadening grin on his face in the mirror .
" Impudence !
Impudence !
" they heard behind them the voice of M'avra Kuzm'inichna who had entered silently . " How he 's grinning , the fat mug !
Is that what you 're here for ?
Nothing 's cleared away down there and Vas'ilich is worn out .
Just you wait a bit ! "
Ign'at left off smiling , adjusted his belt , and went out of the room with meekly downcast eyes .
" Aunt , I did it gently , " said the boy .
" I 'll give you something gently , you monkey you ! "
cried M'avra Kuzm'inichna , raising her arm threateningly . "
Go and get the samovar to boil for your grandfather . "
M'avra Kuzm'inichna flicked the dust off the clavichord and closed it , and with a deep sigh left the drawing room and locked its main door .
Going out into the yard she paused to consider where she should go next - to drink tea in the servants ' wing with Vas'ilich , or into the storeroom to put away what still lay about .
She heard the sound of quick footsteps in the quiet street .
Someone stopped at the gate , and the latch rattled as someone tried to open it .
M'avra Kuzm'inichna went to the gate .
" Who do you want ? "
" The count - Count Ily'a Andr'eevich Rost'ov . "
" And who are you ? "
" An officer , I have to see him , " came the reply in a pleasant , well - bred Russian voice .
M'avra Kuzm'inichna opened the gate and an officer of eighteen , with the round face of a Rost'ov , entered the yard .
" They have gone away , sir .
Went away yesterday at vespertime , " said M'avra Kuzm'inichna cordially .
The young officer standing in the gateway , as if hesitating whether to enter or not , clicked his tongue .
" Ah , how annoying ! " he muttered .
" I should have come yesterday ....
Ah , what a pity . "
Meanwhile , M'avra Kuzm'inichna was attentively and sympathetically examining the familiar Rost'ov features of the young man 's face , his tattered coat and trodden - down boots .
" What did you want to see the count for ? " she asked .
" Oh well ... it ca n't be helped ! " said he in a tone of vexation and placed his hand on the gate as if to leave .
He again paused in indecision .
" You see , " he suddenly said , " I am a kinsman of the count 's and he has been very kind to me .
M'avra Kuzm'inichna did not let him finish .
" Just wait a minute , sir .
One little moment , " said she .
And as soon as the officer let go of the gate handle she turned and , hurrying away on her old legs , went through the back yard to the servants ' quarters .
While M'avra Kuzm'inichna was running to her room the officer walked about the yard gazing at his worn - out boots with lowered head and a faint smile on his lips .
" What a pity I 've missed Uncle !
What a nice old woman !
Where has she run off to ?
And how am I to find the nearest way to overtake my regiment , which must by now be getting near the Rog'ozhski gate ? " thought he .
Just then M'avra Kuzm'inichna appeared from behind the corner of the house with a frightened yet resolute look , carrying a rolled - up check kerchief in her hand .
While still a few steps from the officer she unfolded the kerchief and took out of it a white twenty - five - ruble assignat and hastily handed it to him .
" If his excellency had been at home , as a kinsman he would of course ... but as it is ... "
M'avra Kuzm'inichna grew abashed and confused .
The officer did not decline , but took the note quietly and thanked her .
" If the count had been at home ... " M'avra Kuzm'inichna went on apologetically . "
Christ be with you , sir !
May God preserve you ! "
said she , bowing as she saw him out .
Swaying his head and smiling as if amused at himself , the officer ran almost at a trot through the deserted streets toward the Ya'uza bridge to overtake his regiment .
But M'avra Kuzm'inichna stood at the closed gate for some time with moist eyes , pensively swaying her head and feeling an unexpected flow of motherly tenderness and pity for the unknown young officer .
CHAPTER XXIII
From an unfinished house on the Varv'arka , the ground floor of which was a dramshop , came drunken shouts and songs .
On benches round the tables in a dirty little room sat some ten factory hands .
Tipsy and perspiring , with dim eyes and wide - open mouths , they were all laboriously singing some song or other .
They were singing discordantly , arduously , and with great effort , evidently not because they wished to sing , but because they wanted to show they were drunk and on a spree .
One , a tall , fair - haired lad in a clean blue coat , was standing over the others .
His face with its fine straight nose would have been handsome had it not been for his thin , compressed , twitching lips and dull , gloomy , fixed eyes .
The sleeve of his coat kept slipping down and he always carefully rolled it up again with his left hand , as if it were most important that the sinewy white arm he was flourishing should be bare .
In the midst of the song cries were heard , and fighting and blows in the passage and porch .
The tall lad waved his arm .
" Stop it ! "
he exclaimed peremptorily .
" There 's a fight , lads ! "
And , still rolling up his sleeve , he went out to the porch .
The factory hands followed him .
These men , who under the leadership of the tall lad were drinking in the dramshop that morning , had brought the publican some skins from the factory and for this had had drink served them .
The blacksmiths from a neighboring smithy , hearing the sounds of revelry in the tavern and supposing it to have been broken into , wished to force their way in too and a fight in the porch had resulted .
The publican was fighting one of the smiths at the door , and when the workmen came out the smith , wrenching himself free from the tavern keeper , fell face downward on the pavement .
Another smith tried to enter the doorway , pressing against the publican with his chest .
The lad with the turned - up sleeve gave the smith a blow in the face and cried wildly : " They 're fighting us , lads ! "
At that moment the first smith got up and , scratching his bruised face to make it bleed , shouted in a tearful voice : " Police ! Murder ! ...
They 've killed a man , lads ! "
" Oh , gracious me , a man beaten to death - killed ! ... " screamed a woman coming out of a gate close by .
A crowd gathered round the bloodstained smith .
" Have n't you robbed people enough - taking their last shirts ? " said a voice addressing the publican . "
What have you killed a man for , you thief ? "
The tall lad , standing in the porch , turned his bleared eyes from the publican to the smith and back again as if considering whom he ought to fight now .
" Murderer ! " he shouted suddenly to the publican . "
Bind him , lads ! "
" I daresay you would like to bind me ! " shouted the publican , pushing away the men advancing on him , and snatching his cap from his head he flung it on the ground .
As if this action had some mysterious and menacing significance , the workmen surrounding the publican paused in indecision .
" I know the law very well , mates !
I 'll take the matter to the captain of police .
You think I wo n't get to him ?
Robbery is not permitted to anybody nowadays ! "
shouted the publican , picking up his cap .
" Come along then !
Come along then ! "
the publican and the tall young fellow repeated one after the other , and they moved up the street together .
The bloodstained smith went beside them .
The factory hands and others followed behind , talking and shouting .
" He should pay folks off properly , " a thin workingman , with frowning brows and a straggly beard , was saying .
" But he 's sucked our blood and now he thinks he 's quit of us .
He 's been misleading us all the week and now that he 's brought us to this pass
he 's made off . "
On seeing the crowd and the bloodstained man the workman ceased speaking , and with eager curiosity all the bootmakers joined the moving crowd .
" Where are all the folks going ? "
" Why , to the police , of course ! "
" I say , is it true that we have been beaten ? "
" And what did you think ?
Look what folks are saying . "
Questions and answers were heard .
The publican , taking advantage of the increased crowd , dropped behind and returned to his tavern .
The tall youth , not noticing the disappearance of his foe , waved his bare arm and went on talking incessantly , attracting general attention to himself .
It was around him that the people chiefly crowded , expecting answers from him to the questions that occupied all their minds .
" He must keep order , keep the law , that 's what the government is there for .
Am I not right , good Christians ? " said the tall youth , with a scarcely perceptible smile . "
He thinks there 's no government !
How can one do without government ?
Or else there would be plenty who 'd rob us . "
" Why talk nonsense ? "
rejoined voices in the crowd . "
Will they give up Moscow like this ?
They told you that for fun , and you believed it !
Are n't there plenty of troops on the march ?
Let him in , indeed !
That 's what the government is for .
You 'd better listen to what people are saying , " said some of the mob pointing to the tall youth .
By the wall of China - Town a smaller group of people were gathered round a man in a frieze coat who held a paper in his hand .
" An uk'ase , they are reading an uk'ase !
Reading an uk'ase ! "
cried voices in the crowd , and the people rushed toward the reader .
The man in the frieze coat was reading the broadsheet of August 31 .
I will come back to dinner , and we 'll set to work .
We will do , completely do , and undo these scoundrels . "
The last words were read out in the midst of complete silence .
The tall lad hung his head gloomily .
It was evident that no one had understood the last part .
In particular , the words " I will come back to dinner , " evidently displeased both reader and audience .
The people 's minds were tuned to a high pitch and this was too simple and needlessly comprehensible
- it was what any one of them might have said and therefore was what an uk'ase emanating from the highest authority should not say .
They all stood despondent and silent .
The tall youth moved his lips and swayed from side to side .
" We should ask him ... that 's he himself ? " ... " Yes , ask him indeed ! ...
Why not ?
He 'll explain " ...
voices in the rear of the crowd were suddenly heard saying , and the general attention turned to the police superintendent 's trap which drove into the square attended by two mounted dragoons .
" What people are these ? " he shouted to the men , who were moving singly and timidly in the direction of his trap .
" What people are these ? " he shouted again , receiving no answer .
" The count has not left , he is here , and an order will be issued concerning you , " said the superintendent of police .
" Go on ! "
he ordered his coachman .
The crowd halted , pressing around those who had heard what the superintendent had said , and looking at the departing trap .
The superintendent of police turned round at that moment with a scared look , said something to his coachman , and his horses increased their speed .
" It 's a fraud , lads !
Lead the way to him , himself ! "
shouted the tall youth .
" Do n't let him go , lads !
Let him answer us !
Keep him ! "
shouted different people and the people dashed in pursuit of the trap .
Following the superintendent of police and talking loudly the crowd went in the direction of the Luby'anka Street .
" There now , the gentry and merchants have gone away and left us to perish .
Do they think we 're dogs ? "
voices in the crowd were heard saying more and more frequently .
CHAPTER XXIV
Distressed , offended , and surprised by all this , Rostopch'in had returned to Moscow .
After supper he lay down on a sofa without undressing , and was awakened soon after midnight by a courier bringing him a letter from Kut'uzov .
This letter requested the count to send police officers to guide the troops through the town , as the army was retreating to the Ryaz'an road beyond Moscow .
This was not news to Rostopch'in .
If one accepts this twofold aim all Rostopch'in 's actions appear irreproachable .
" Why were the holy relics , the arms , ammunition , gunpowder , and stores of corn not removed ?
Why were thousands of inhabitants deceived into believing that Moscow would not be given up - and thereby ruined ? "
" To preserve the tranquillity of the city , " explains Count Rostopch'in .
" Why were bundles of useless papers from the government offices , and Leppich 's balloon and other articles removed ? "
" To leave the town empty , " explains Count Rostopch'in .
One need only admit that public tranquillity is in danger and any action finds a justification .
All the horrors of the reign of terror were based only on solicitude for public tranquillity .
On what , then , was Count Rostopch'in 's fear for the tranquillity of Moscow based in 1812 ?
What reason was there for assuming any probability of an uprising in the city ?
The inhabitants were leaving it and the retreating troops were filling it .
Why should that cause the masses to riot ?
Neither in Moscow nor anywhere in Russia did anything resembling an insurrection ever occur when the enemy entered a town .
More than ten thousand people were still in Moscow on the first and second of September , and except for a mob in the governor 's courtyard , assembled there at his bidding , nothing happened .
Rostopch'in , though he had patriotic sentiments , was a sanguine and impulsive man who had always moved in the highest administrative circles and had no understanding at all of the people he supposed himself to be guiding .
Ever since the enemy 's entry into Smol'ensk he had in imagination been playing the role of director of the popular feeling of " the heart of Russia .
Though he knew it was coming , he did not till the last moment wholeheartedly believe that Moscow would be abandoned , and did not prepare for it .
The inhabitants left against his wishes .
If the government offices were removed , this was only done on the demand of officials to whom the count yielded reluctantly .
He was absorbed in the role he had created for himself .
He unexpectedly felt himself ridiculous , weak , and alone , with no ground to stand on .
When , awakened from his sleep , he received that cold , peremptory note from Kut'uzov , he felt the more irritated the more he felt himself to blame .
All that he had been specially put in charge of , the state property which he should have removed , was still in Moscow and it was no longer possible to take the whole of it away .
" Who is to blame for it ?
Who has let things come to such a pass ? " he ruminated . "
Not I , of course .
I had everything ready .
I had Moscow firmly in hand .
And this is what they have let it come to !
Villains !
Traitors !
All that night Count Rostopch'in issued orders , for which people came to him from all parts of Moscow .
Those about him had never seen the count so morose and irritable .
" Your excellency , the Director of the Registrar 's Department has sent for instructions ....
From the Consistory , from the Senate , from the University , from the Foundling Hospital , the Suffragan has sent ... asking for information ....
What are your orders about the Fire Brigade ?
From the governor of the prison ... from the superintendent of the lunatic asylum ... " All night long such announcements were continually being received by the count .
" Oh , tell that blockhead , " he said in reply to the question from the Registrar 's Department , " that he should remain to guard his documents .
Now why are you asking silly questions about the Fire Brigade ?
They have horses , let them be off to Vlad'imir , and not leave them to the French . "
" Your excellency , the superintendent of the lunatic asylum has come : what are your commands ? "
" My commands ?
Let them go away , that 's all ....
And let the lunatics out into the town .
When lunatics command our armies God evidently means these other madmen to be free . "
In reply to an inquiry about the convicts in the prison , Count Rostopch'in shouted angrily at the governor :
" Do you expect me to give you two battalions - which we have not got - for a convoy ?
Release them , that 's all about it ! "
" Your excellency , there are some political prisoners , Meshk'ov , Vereshch'agin ... "
" Vereshch'agin !
Has n't he been hanged yet ? " shouted Rostopch'in .
" Bring him to me ! "
CHAPTER XXV
Toward nine o'clock in the morning , when the troops were already moving through Moscow , nobody came to the count any more for instructions .
Those who were able to get away were going of their own accord , those who remained behind decided for themselves what they must do .
The count ordered his carriage that he might drive to Sok'olniki , and sat in his study with folded hands , morose , sallow , and taciturn .
But as soon as a storm arises and the sea begins to heave and the ship to move , such a delusion is no longer possible .
Rostopch'in felt this , and it was this which exasperated him .
The superintendent of police , whom the crowd had stopped , went in to see him at the same time as an adjutant who informed the count that the horses were harnessed .
The tall lad was standing in front , flourishing his arm and saying something with a stern look .
The blood - stained smith stood beside him with a gloomy face .
A drone of voices was audible through the closed window .
" Is my carriage ready ? " asked Rostopch'in , stepping back from the window .
" It is , your excellency , " replied the adjutant .
Rostopch'in went again to the balcony door .
" But what do they want ?
" he asked the superintendent of police .
" Your excellency , they say they have got ready , according to your orders , to go against the French , and they shouted something about treachery .
But it is a turbulent crowd , your excellency - I hardly managed to get away from it .
Your excellency , I venture to suggest ... "
" You may go .
I do n't need you to tell me what to do ! "
exclaimed Rostopch'in angrily .
He stood by the balcony door looking at the crowd .
" This is what they have done with Russia !
This is what they have done with me ! "
thought he , full of an irrepressible fury that welled up within him against the someone to whom what was happening might be attributed .
As often happens with passionate people , he was mastered by anger but was still seeking an object on which to vent it . "
Here is that mob , the dregs of the people , " he thought as he gazed at the crowd : " this rabble they have roused by their folly !
They want a victim , " he thought as he looked at the tall lad flourishing his arm .
And this thought occurred to him just because he himself desired a victim , something on which to vent his rage .
" Is the carriage ready ? " he asked again .
" Yes , your excellency .
What are your orders about Vereshch'agin ?
He is waiting at the porch , " said the adjutant .
" Ah ! " exclaimed Rostopch'in , as if struck by an unexpected recollection .
And rapidly opening the door he went resolutely out onto the balcony .
The talking instantly ceased , hats and caps were doffed , and all eyes were raised to the count .
" Good morning , lads ! " said the count briskly and loudly .
" Thank you for coming .
I 'll come out to you in a moment , but we must first settle with the villain .
We must punish the villain who has caused the ruin of Moscow .
Wait for me ! "
And the count stepped as briskly back into the room and slammed the door behind him .
A murmur of approbation and satisfaction ran through the crowd . "
He 'll settle with all the villains , you 'll see !
And you said the French ...
He 'll show you what law is ! "
the mob were saying as if reproving one another for their lack of confidence .
A few minutes later an officer came hurriedly out of the front door , gave an order , and the dragoons formed up in line .
The crowd moved eagerly from the balcony toward the porch .
Rostopch'in , coming out there with quick angry steps , looked hastily around as if seeking someone .
" Where is he ? " he inquired .
And as he spoke he saw a young man coming round the corner of the house between two dragoons .
He had a long thin neck , and his head , that had been half shaved , was again covered by short hair .
On his thin , weak legs were heavy chains which hampered his irresolute movements .
" Ah ! " said Rostopch'in , hurriedly turning away his eyes from the young man in the fur - lined coat and pointing to the bottom step of the porch .
" Put him there . "
For several seconds while the young man was taking his place on the step the silence continued .
Only among the back rows of the people , who were all pressing toward the one spot , could sighs , groans , and the shuffling of feet be heard .
While waiting for the young man to take his place on the step Rostopch'in stood frowning and rubbing his face with his hand .
" Lads ! " said he , with a metallic ring in his voice . "
This man , Vereshch'agin , is the scoundrel by whose doing Moscow is perishing . "
The young man in the fur - lined coat , stooping a little , stood in a submissive attitude , his fingers clasped before him .
His emaciated young face , disfigured by the half - shaven head , hung down hopelessly .
At the count 's first words he raised it slowly and looked up at him as if wishing to say something or at least to meet his eye .
But Rostopch'in did not look at him .
A vein in the young man 's long thin neck swelled like a cord and went blue behind the ear , and suddenly his face flushed .
All eyes were fixed on him .
He looked at the crowd , and rendered more hopeful by the expression he read on the faces there , he smiled sadly and timidly , and lowering his head shifted his feet on the step .
" He has betrayed his Tsar and his country , he has gone over to Bonaparte .
As if inflamed by the sight , he raised his arm and addressed the people , almost shouting :
" Deal with him as you think fit !
I hand him over to you . "
The crowd remained silent and only pressed closer and closer to one another .
To keep one another back , to breathe in that stifling atmosphere , to be unable to stir , and to await something unknown , uncomprehended , and terrible , was becoming unbearable .
" Beat him ! ...
Let the traitor perish and not disgrace the Russian name ! " shouted Rostopch'in . "
Cut him down .
I command it . "
Hearing not so much the words as the angry tone of Rostopch'in 's voice , the crowd moaned and heaved forward , but again paused .
" Count ! " exclaimed the timid yet theatrical voice of Vereshch'agin in the midst of the momentary silence that ensued , " Count !
One God is above us both .... "
He lifted his head and again the thick vein in his thin neck filled with blood and the color rapidly came and went in his face .
He did not finish what he wished to say .
" Cut him down !
I command it ... " shouted Rostopch'in , suddenly growing pale like Vereshch'agin .
" Draw sabers ! " cried the dragoon officer , drawing his own .
Another still stronger wave flowed through the crowd and reaching the front ranks carried it swaying to the very steps of the porch .
The tall youth , with a stony look on his face , and rigid and uplifted arm , stood beside Vereshch'agin .
" Saber him ! " the dragoon officer almost whispered .
And one of the soldiers , his face all at once distorted with fury , struck Vereshch'agin on the head with the blunt side of his saber .
" Ah ! " cried Vereshch'agin in meek surprise , looking round with a frightened glance as if not understanding why this was done to him .
A similar moan of surprise and horror ran through the crowd . "
O Lord ! " exclaimed a sorrowful voice .
But after the exclamation of surprise that had escaped from Vereshch'agin
he uttered a plaintive cry of pain , and that cry was fatal .
The barrier of human feeling , strained to the utmost , that had held the crowd in check suddenly broke .
The crime had begun and must now be completed .
The plaintive moan of reproach was drowned by the threatening and angry roar of the crowd .
Like the seventh and last wave that shatters a ship , that last irresistible wave burst from the rear and reached the front ranks , carrying them off their feet and engulfing them all .
The dragoon was about to repeat his blow .
Vereshch'agin with a cry of horror , covering his head with his hands , rushed toward the crowd .
The tall youth , against whom he stumbled , seized his thin neck with his hands and , yelling wildly , fell with him under the feet of the pressing , struggling crowd .
Some beat and tore at Vereshch'agin , others at the tall youth .
And the screams of those that were being trampled on and of those who tried to rescue the tall lad only increased the fury of the crowd .
It was a long time before the dragoons could extricate the bleeding youth , beaten almost to death .
" Hit him with an ax , eh ! ...
Crushed ? ...
Traitor , he sold Christ ....
Still alive ... tenacious ... serves him right !
Torture serves a thief right .
Use the hatchet ! ...
What - still alive ? "
Only when the victim ceased to struggle and his cries changed to a long - drawn , measured death rattle did the crowd around his prostrate , bleeding corpse begin rapidly to change places .
Each one came up , glanced at what had been done , and with horror , reproach , and astonishment pushed back again .
" O Lord !
The people are like wild beasts !
How could he be alive ? "
voices in the crowd could be heard saying .
" Quite a young fellow too ... must have been a merchant 's son .
What men ! ...
and they say he 's not the right one ....
How not the right one ? ...
O Lord !
And there 's another
has been beaten too - they say he 's nearly done for ....
Oh , the people ...
Are n't they afraid of sinning ?
... " said the same mob now , looking with pained distress at the dead body with its long , thin , half - severed neck and its livid face stained with blood and dust .
A painstaking police officer , considering the presence of a corpse in his excellency 's courtyard unseemly , told the dragoons to take it away .
Two dragoons took it by its distorted legs and dragged it along the ground .
The gory , dust - stained , half - shaven head with its long neck trailed twisting along the ground .
The crowd shrank back from it .
The count 's face was white and he could not control the feverish twitching of his lower jaw .
" This way , your excellency ... Where are you going ? ...
This way , please ... " said a trembling , frightened voice behind him .
Count Rostopch'in was unable to reply and , turning obediently , went in the direction indicated .
At the back entrance stood his cal`eche .
The distant roar of the yelling crowd was audible even there .
He hastily took his seat and told the coachman to drive him to his country house in Sok'olniki .
When they reached the Myasn'itski Street and could no longer hear the shouts of the mob , the count began to repent .
He remembered with dissatisfaction the agitation and fear he had betrayed before his subordinates . "
The mob is terrible - disgusting , " he said to himself in French .
" They are like wolves whom nothing but flesh can appease . " " Count !
One God is above us
both!"-Vereshch'agin 's words suddenly recurred to him , and a disagreeable shiver ran down his back .
But this was only a momentary feeling and Count Rostopch'in smiled disdainfully at himself .
" I had other duties , " thought he .
" The people had to be appeased .
Had I been simply Theodore Vas'ilyevich
my course of action would have been quite different , but it was my duty to safeguard my life and dignity as commander in chief . "
The thought which tranquillized Rostopch'in was not a new one .
Since the world began and men have killed one another no one has ever committed such a crime against his fellow man without comforting himself with this same idea .
This idea is le bien public , the hypothetical welfare of other people .
To a man not swayed by passion that welfare is never certain , but he who commits such a crime always knows just where that welfare lies .
And Rostopch'in now knew it .
" Vereshch'agin was tried and condemned to death , " thought Rostopch'in ( though the Senate had only condemned Vereshch'agin to hard labor ) , " he was a traitor and a spy .
I could not let him go unpunished and so I have killed two birds with one stone : to appease the mob I gave them a victim and at the same time punished a miscreant . "
Having reached his country house and begun to give orders about domestic arrangements , the count grew quite tranquil .
Half an hour later he was driving with his fast horses across the Sok'olniki field , no longer thinking of what had occurred but considering what was to come .
He was driving to the Ya'uza bridge where he had heard that Kut'uzov was .
Count Rostopch'in was mentally preparing the angry and stinging reproaches he meant to address to Kut'uzov for his deception .
Planning beforehand what he would say to Kut'uzov , Rostopch'in turned angrily in his cal`eche and gazed sternly from side to side .
The Sok'olniki field was deserted .
Only at the end of it , in front of the almshouse and the lunatic asylum , could be seen some people in white and others like them walking singly across the field shouting and gesticulating .
The lunatic 's solemn , gloomy face was thin and yellow , with its beard growing in uneven tufts .
His black , agate pupils with saffron - yellow whites moved restlessly near the lower eyelids .
" Stop !
Pull up , I tell you ! "
he cried in a piercing voice , and again shouted something breathlessly with emphatic intonations and gestures .
Coming abreast of the cal`eche he ran beside it .
" Thrice have they slain me , thrice have I risen from the dead .
They stoned me , crucified me ...
I shall rise ... shall rise ... shall rise .
They have torn my body .
The kingdom of God will be overthrown ...
Thrice will I overthrow it and thrice re - establish it ! "
he cried , raising his voice higher and higher .
Count Rostopch'in suddenly grew pale as he had done when the crowd closed in on Vereshch'agin .
He turned away . "
Go fas ... faster ! "
he cried in a trembling voice to his coachman .
Recent as that mental picture was , Rostopch'in already felt that it had cut deep into his heart and drawn blood .
He seemed still to hear the sound of his own words : " Cut him down !
I command it .... "
" Why did I utter those words ?
It was by some accident I said them ....
I need not have said them , " he thought .
" And then nothing would have happened . "
He saw the frightened and then infuriated face of the dragoon who dealt the blow , the look of silent , timid reproach that boy in the fur - lined coat had turned upon him . "
But I did not do it for my own sake .
I was bound to act that way ....
The mob , the traitor ... the public welfare , " thought he .
Troops were still crowding at the Ya'uza bridge .
It was hot . Kut'uzov , dejected and frowning , sat on a bench by the bridge toying with his whip in the sand when a cal`eche dashed up noisily .
A man in a general 's uniform with plumes in his hat went up to Kut'uzov and said something in French .
It was Count Rostopch'in .
He told Kut'uzov that he had come because Moscow , the capital , was no more and only the army remained .
" Things would have been different if your Serene Highness had not told me that you would not abandon Moscow without another battle ; all this would not have happened , " he said .
Kut'uzov looked at Rostopch'in as if , not grasping what was said to him , he was trying to read something peculiar written at that moment on the face of the man addressing him .
Rostopch'in grew confused and became silent .
Kut'uzov slightly shook his head and not taking his penetrating gaze from Rostopch'in 's face muttered softly :
" No ! I shall not give up Moscow without a battle ! "
Whether Kut'uzov was thinking of something entirely different when he spoke those words , or uttered them purposely , knowing them to be meaningless , at any rate Rostopch'in made no reply and hastily left him .
And strange to say , the Governor of Moscow , the proud Count Rostopch'in , took up a Cossack whip and went to the bridge where he began with shouts to drive on the carts that blocked the way .
CHAPTER XXVI
Toward four o'clock in the afternoon Murat 's troops were entering Moscow .
In front rode a detachment of W"urttemberg hussars and behind them rode the King of Naples himself accompanied by a numerous suite .
Around Murat gathered a group of those who had remained in Moscow .
They all stared in timid bewilderment at the strange , long - haired commander dressed up in feathers and gold .
" Is that their Tsar himself ?
He 's not bad ! "
low voices could be heard saying .
An interpreter rode up to the group .
" Take off your cap ... your caps ! "
These words went from one to another in the crowd .
The interpreter addressed an old porter and asked if it was far to the Kr'emlin .
The porter , listening in perplexity to the unfamiliar Polish accent and not realizing that the interpreter was speaking Russian , did not understand what was being said to him and slipped behind the others .
Murat approached the interpreter and told him to ask where the Russian army was .
One of the Russians understood what was asked and several voices at once began answering the interpreter .
A French officer , returning from the advanced detachment , rode up to Murat and reported that the gates of the citadel had been barricaded and that there was probably an ambuscade there .
" Good ! " said Murat and , turning to one of the gentlemen in his suite , ordered four light guns to be moved forward to fire at the gates .
The guns emerged at a trot from the column following Murat and advanced up the Arb'at .
When they reached the end of the Vozdv'izhenka Street they halted and drew in the Square .
Several French officers superintended the placing of the guns and looked at the Kr'emlin through field glasses .
The bells in the Kr'emlin were ringing for vespers , and this sound troubled the French .
They imagined it to be a call to arms .
A few infantrymen ran to the Kut'afyev Gate .
Beams and wooden screens had been put there , and two musket shots rang out from under the gate as soon as an officer and men began to run toward it .
A general who was standing by the guns shouted some words of command to the officer , and the latter ran back again with his men .
The sound of three more shots came from the gate .
One shot struck a French soldier 's foot , and from behind the screens came the strange sound of a few voices shouting .
Instantly as at a word of command the expression of cheerful serenity on the faces of the French general , officers , and men changed to one of determined concentrated readiness for strife and suffering .
And all made ready for that battle .
The cries from the gates ceased .
The guns were advanced , the artillerymen blew the ash off their linstocks , and an officer gave the word " Fire ! "
This was followed by two whistling sounds of canister shot , one after another .
The shot rattled against the stone of the gate and upon the wooden beams and screens , and two wavering clouds of smoke rose over the Square .
A few instants after the echo of the reports resounding over the stone - built Kr'emlin had died away the French heard a strange sound above their head .
Thousands of crows rose above the walls and circled in the air , cawing and noisily flapping their wings .
Together with that sound came a solitary human cry from the gateway and amid the smoke appeared the figure of a bareheaded man in a peasant 's coat .
He grasped a musket and took aim at the French . "
Fire ! " repeated the officer once more , and the reports of a musket and of two cannon shots were heard simultaneously .
The gate was again hidden by smoke .
Nothing more stirred behind the screens and the French infantry soldiers and officers advanced to the gate .
In the gateway lay three wounded and four dead .
Two men in peasant coats ran away at the foot of the wall , toward the Zn'amenka .
" Clear that away ! " said the officer , pointing to the beams and the corpses , and the French soldiers , after dispatching the wounded , threw the corpses over the parapet .
Who these men were nobody knew .
" Clear that away ! " was all that was said of them , and they were thrown over the parapet and removed later on that they might not stink .
Some of them were sabered and the Kr'emlin was purged of their presence . "
Murat was informed that the way had been cleared .
The French entered the gates and began pitching their camp in the Senate Square .
Out of the windows of the Senate House the soldiers threw chairs into the Square for fuel and kindled fires there .
Other detachments passed through the Kr'emlin and encamped along the Moros'eyka , the Luby'anka , and Pokr'ovka Streets .
Others quartered themselves along the Vozdv'izhenka , the Nik'olski , and the Tversk'oy Streets .
No masters of the houses being found anywhere , the French were not billeted on the inhabitants as is usual in towns but lived in it as in a camp .
Though tattered , hungry , worn out , and reduced to a third of their original number , the French entered Moscow in good marching order .
It was a weary and famished , but still a fighting and menacing army .
But it remained an army only until its soldiers had dispersed into their different lodgings .
When five weeks later these same men left Moscow , they no longer formed an army .
They were a mob of marauders , each carrying a quantity of articles which seemed to him valuable or useful .
The aim of each man when he left Moscow was no longer , as it had been , to conquer , but merely to keep what he had acquired .
Ten minutes after each regiment had entered a Moscow district , not a soldier or officer was left .
Men in military uniforms and Hessian boots could be seen through the windows , laughing and walking through the rooms .
There were many such men both in the shops and houses - but there was no army .
But despite all these measures the men , who had till then constituted an army , flowed all over the wealthy , deserted city with its comforts and plentiful supplies .
No residents were left in Moscow , and the soldiers - like water percolating through sand - spread irresistibly through the city in all directions from the Kr'emlin into which they had first marched .
Many of them appropriated several houses , chalked their names on them , and quarreled and even fought with other companies for them .
The officers followed to check the soldiers and were involuntarily drawn into doing the same .
In Carriage Row carriages had been left in the shops , and generals flocked there to select cal`eches and coaches for themselves .
The few inhabitants who had remained invited commanding officers to their houses , hoping thereby to secure themselves from being plundered .
There were masses of wealth and there seemed no end to it .
All around the quarters occupied by the French were other regions still unexplored and unoccupied where , they thought , yet greater riches might be found .
And Moscow engulfed the army ever deeper and deeper .
The French attributed the Fire of Moscow au patriotisme f'eroce de Rostopch'ine , * the Russians to the barbarity of the French .
In reality , however , it was not , and could not be , possible to explain the burning of Moscow by making any individual , or any group of people , responsible for it .
Deserted Moscow had to burn as inevitably as a heap of shavings has to burn on which sparks continually fall for several days .
In peacetime it is only necessary to billet troops in the villages of any district and the number of fires in that district immediately increases .
How much then must the probability of fire be increased in an abandoned , wooden town where foreign troops are quartered . "
Le patriotisme f'eroce de Rostopch'ine " and the barbarity of the French were not to blame in the matter .
Moscow was set on fire by the soldiers ' pipes , kitchens , and campfires , and by the carelessness of enemy soldiers occupying houses they did not own .
* To Rostopch'in 's ferocious patriotism .
Moscow was burned by its inhabitants , it is true , but by those who had abandoned it and not by those who remained in it .
CHAPTER XXVII
The absorption of the French by Moscow , radiating starwise as it did , only reached the quarter where Pierre was staying by the evening of the second of September .
After the last two days spent in solitude and unusual circumstances , Pierre was in a state bordering on insanity .
He was completely obsessed by one persistent thought .
He had left home only to escape the intricate tangle of life 's demands that enmeshed him , and which in his present condition he was unable to unravel .
He sought a quiet refuge , and in Joseph Alex'eevich 's study he really found it .
When Ger'asim roused him from his reverie the idea occurred to him of taking part in the popular defense of Moscow which he knew was projected .
And with that object he had asked Ger'asim to get him a peasant 's coat and a pistol , confiding to him his intentions of remaining in Joseph Alex'eevich 's house and keeping his name secret .
How splendid ! "
the thought flashed into his mind that it really would be a good thing , even if Moscow were taken , for him to remain there and do what he was predestined to do .
Next day , with the sole idea of not sparing himself and not lagging in any way behind them , Pierre went to the Three Hills gate .
But when he returned to the house convinced that Moscow would not be defended , he suddenly felt that what before had seemed to him merely a possibility had now become absolutely necessary and inevitable .
Pierre knew all the details of the attempt on Bonaparte 's life in 1809 by a German student in Vienna , and knew that the student had been shot .
And the risk to which he would expose his life by carrying out his design excited him still more .
Two equally strong feelings drew Pierre irresistibly to this purpose .
The other was that vague and quite Russian feeling of contempt for everything conventional , artificial , and human - for everything the majority of men regard as the greatest good in the world .
From the very day Pierre had experienced this feeling for the first time at the Slob'oda Palace he had been continuously under its influence , but only now found full satisfaction for it .
Moreover , at this moment Pierre was supported in his design and prevented from renouncing it by what he had already done in that direction .
Pierre 's physical condition , as is always the case , corresponded to his mental state .
It was two o'clock in the afternoon .
The French had already entered Moscow .
Pierre knew this , but instead of acting he only thought about his undertaking , going over its minutest details in his mind .
In his fancy he did not clearly picture to himself either the striking of the blow or the death of Napoleon , but with extraordinary vividness and melancholy enjoyment imagined his own destruction and heroic endurance .
" Yes , alone , for the sake of all , I must do it or perish ! " he thought .
" Yes , I will approach ... and then suddenly ... with pistol or dagger ?
But that is all the same ! '
It is not I but the hand of Providence that punishes thee , ' I shall say , " thought he , imagining what he would say when killing Napoleon . "
Well then , take me and execute me ! "
he went on , speaking to himself and bowing his head with a sad but firm expression .
His dressing gown was unfastened , his face red and distorted .
He was obviously drunk .
On seeing Pierre he grew confused at first , but noticing embarrassment on Pierre 's face immediately grew bold and , staggering on his thin legs , advanced into the middle of the room .
" They 're frightened , " he said confidentially in a hoarse voice .
" I say I wo n't surrender , I say ...
Am I not right , sir ? "
He paused and then suddenly seeing the pistol on the table seized it with unexpected rapidity and ran out into the corridor .
Ger'asim and the porter , who had followed Mak'ar Alex'eevich , stopped him in the vestibule and tried to take the pistol from him .
Pierre , coming out into the corridor , looked with pity and repulsion at the half - crazy old man .
Mak'ar
Alex'eevich , frowning with exertion , held on to the pistol and screamed hoarsely , evidently with some heroic fancy in his head .
" To arms !
Board them !
No , you sha n't get it , " he yelled .
" That will do , please , that will do .
Have the goodness - please , sir , to let go !
Please , sir ... " pleaded Ger'asim , trying carefully to steer Mak'ar Alex'eevich by the elbows back to the door .
" Who are you ?
Bonaparte ! ... " shouted Mak'ar Alex'eevich .
" That 's not right , sir .
Come to your room , please , and rest .
Allow me to have the pistol . "
" Be off , thou base slave !
Touch me not !
See this ?
" shouted Mak'ar Alex'eevich , brandishing the pistol . "
Board them ! "
" Catch hold ! "
whispered Ger'asim to the porter .
They seized Mak'ar Alex'eevich by the arms and dragged him to the door .
The vestibule was filled with the discordant sounds of a struggle and of a tipsy , hoarse voice .
Suddenly a fresh sound , a piercing feminine scream , reverberated from the porch and the cook came running into the vestibule .
" It 's them !
Gracious heavens !
O Lord , four of them , horsemen !
" she cried .
Ger'asim and the porter let Mak'ar Alex'eevich go , and in the now silent corridor the sound of several hands knocking at the front door could be heard .
CHAPTER XXVIII
But the French entered and still Pierre did not retire - an irresistible curiosity kept him there .
There were two of them .
One was an officer - a tall , soldierly , handsome man - the other evidently a private or an orderly , sunburned , short , and thin , with sunken cheeks and a dull expression .
The officer walked in front , leaning on a stick and slightly limping .
Having done that , the officer , lifting his elbow with a smart gesture , stroked his mustache and lightly touched his hat .
" Bonjour , la compagnie ! "
* said he gaily , smiling and looking about him .
* " Good day , everybody ! "
No one gave any reply .
" Vous ^etes le bourgeois ? "
* the officer asked Ger'asim .
* " Are you the master here ? "
Ger'asim gazed at the officer with an alarmed and inquiring look .
" Quartier , quartier , logement ! " said the officer , looking down at the little man with a condescending and good - natured smile .
"
Les francais sont de bons enfants .
Que diable !
Voyons !
Ne nous f^achons pas , mon vieux ! "
* added he , clapping the scared and silent Ger'asim on the shoulder . "
Well , does no one speak French in this establishment ?
" he asked again in French , looking around and meeting Pierre 's eyes .
Pierre moved away from the door .
* " Quarters , quarters , lodgings !
The French are good fellows .
What the devil !
There , do n't let us be cross , old fellow ! "
Again the officer turned to Ger'asim and asked him to show him the rooms in the house .
" Master , not here - don't understand ... me , you ... " said Ger'asim , trying to render his words more comprehensible by contorting them .
Still smiling , the French officer spread out his hands before Ger'asim 's nose , intimating that he did not understand him either , and moved , limping , to the door at which Pierre was standing .
Pierre wished to go away and conceal himself , but at that moment he saw Mak'ar Alex'eevich appearing at the open kitchen door with the pistol in his hand .
With a madman 's cunning , Mak'ar Alex'eevich eyed the Frenchman , raised his pistol , and took aim .
" Board them ! " yelled the tipsy man , trying to press the trigger .
Hearing the yell the officer turned round , and at the same moment Pierre threw himself on the drunkard .
Just when Pierre snatched at and struck up the pistol
Mak'ar Alex'eevich at last got his fingers on the trigger , there was a deafening report , and all were enveloped in a cloud of smoke .
The Frenchman turned pale and rushed to the door .
Forgetting his intention of concealing his knowledge of French , Pierre , snatching away the pistol and throwing it down , ran up to the officer and addressed him in French .
" You are not wounded ? " he asked .
" I think not , " answered the Frenchman , feeling himself over . "
But I have had a lucky escape this time , " he added , pointing to the damaged plaster of the wall .
" Who is that man ? " said he , looking sternly at Pierre .
" Oh , I am really in despair at what has occurred , " said Pierre rapidly , quite forgetting the part he had intended to play .
" He is an unfortunate madman who did not know what he was doing . "
The officer went up to Mak'ar Alex'eevich and took him by the collar .
Mak'ar Alex'eevich was standing with parted lips , swaying , as if about to fall asleep , as he leaned against the wall .
" Brigand !
You shall pay for this , " said the Frenchman , letting go of him .
" We French are merciful after victory , but we do not pardon traitors , " he added , with a look of gloomy dignity and a fine energetic gesture .
Pierre continued , in French , to persuade the officer not to hold that drunken imbecile to account .
The Frenchman listened in silence with the same gloomy expression , but suddenly turned to Pierre with a smile .
For a few seconds he looked at him in silence .
His handsome face assumed a melodramatically gentle expression and he held out his hand .
" You have saved my life .
You are French , " said he .
For a Frenchman that deduction was indubitable .
Only a Frenchman could perform a great deed , and to save his life - the life of M. Ramballe , captain of the 13th Light Regiment - was undoubtedly a very great deed .
But however indubitable that conclusion and the officer 's conviction based upon it , Pierre felt it necessary to disillusion him .
" I am Russian , " he said quickly .
" Tut , tut , tut !
Tell that to others , " said the officer , waving his finger before his nose and smiling .
" You shall tell me all about that presently .
I am delighted to meet a compatriot .
Well , and what are we to do with this man ? "
he added , addressing himself to Pierre as to a brother .
Even if Pierre were not a Frenchman , having once received that loftiest of human appellations he could not renounce it , said the officer 's look and tone .
The Frenchman expanded his chest and made a majestic gesture with his arm .
" You have saved my life !
You are French .
You ask his pardon ?
I grant it you .
Lead that man away ! "
said he quickly and energetically , and taking the arm of Pierre whom he had promoted to be a Frenchman for saving his life , he went with him into the room .
The soldiers in the yard , hearing the shot , came into the passage asking what had happened , and expressed their readiness to punish the culprits , but the officer sternly checked them .
" You will be called in when you are wanted , " he said .
The soldiers went out again , and the orderly , who had meanwhile had time to visit the kitchen , came up to his officer .
" Captain , there is soup and a leg of mutton in the kitchen , " said he .
" Shall I serve them up ? "
" Yes , and some wine , " answered the captain .
CHAPTER XXIX
When the French officer went into the room with Pierre the latter again thought it his duty to assure him that he was not French and wished to go away , but the officer would not hear of it .
" A Frenchman or a Russian prince incognito , " said the officer , looking at Pierre 's fine though dirty linen and at the ring on his finger .
" I owe my life to you and offer you my friendship .
A Frenchman never forgets either an insult or a service .
I offer you my friendship .
That is all I can say . "
Will you now be so good as to tell me with whom I have the honor of conversing so pleasantly , instead of being in the ambulance with that maniac 's bullet in my body ? "
Pierre replied that he could not tell him his name and , blushing , began to try to invent a name and to say something about his reason for concealing it , but the Frenchman hastily interrupted him .
" Oh , please ! " said he .
" I understand your reasons .
You are an officer ... a superior officer perhaps .
You have borne arms against us .
That 's not my business .
I owe you my life .
That is enough for me .
I am quite at your service .
You belong to the gentry ?
" he concluded with a shade of inquiry in his tone .
Pierre bent his head . "
Your baptismal name , if you please .
That is all I ask .
Monsieur Pierre , you say ....
That 's all I want to know . "
Delicious ! "
His face grew red and was covered with perspiration .
Pierre was hungry and shared the dinner with pleasure .
Morel , the orderly , brought some hot water in a saucepan and placed a bottle of claret in it .
He also brought a bottle of kvass , taken from the kitchen for them to try .
That beverage was already known to the French and had been given a special name .
They called it limonade de cochon ( pig 's lemonade ) , and Morel spoke well of the limonade de cochon he had found in the kitchen .
But as the captain had the wine they had taken while passing through Moscow , he left the kvass to Morel and applied himself to the bottle of Bordeaux .
He wrapped the bottle up to its neck in a table napkin and poured out wine for himself and for Pierre .
The satisfaction of his hunger and the wine rendered the captain still more lively and he chatted incessantly all through dinner .
" Yes , my dear Monsieur Pierre , I owe you a fine votive candle for saving me from that maniac ....
You see , I have bullets enough in my body already .
Sacr'e Dieu !
It was splendid !
That deluge of fire was worth seeing .
It was a tough job you set us there , my word !
You may be proud of it !
And on my honor , in spite of the cough I caught there , I should be ready to begin again .
I pity those who did not see it . "
" I was there , " said Pierre .
" Bah , really ?
So much the better !
You are certainly brave foes .
The great redoubt held out well , by my pipe ! " continued the Frenchman . "
And you made us pay dear for it .
I was at it three times - sure as I sit here .
Three times we reached the guns and three times we were thrown back like cardboard figures .
Oh , it was beautiful , Monsieur Pierre !
Your grenadiers were splendid , by heaven !
I saw them close up their ranks six times in succession and march as if on parade .
Fine fellows !
Our King of Naples , who knows what 's what , cried ' Bravo ! '
Ha , ha !
So you are one of us soldiers ! "
he added , smiling , after a momentary pause . "
So much the better , so much the better , Monsieur Pierre !
Terrible in battle ...
gallant ... with the fair "
( he winked and smiled ) ,
" that 's what the French are , Monsieur Pierre , are n't they ? "
The captain was so na"ively and good - humoredly gay , so real , and so pleased with himself that Pierre almost winked back as he looked merrily at him .
Probably the word " gallant " turned the captain 's thoughts to the state of Moscow .
" Apropos , tell me please , is it true that the women have all left Moscow ?
What a queer idea !
What had they to be afraid of ? "
" Would not the French ladies leave Paris if the Russians entered it ? " asked Pierre .
" Ha , ha , ha ! "
The Frenchman emitted a merry , sanguine chuckle , patting Pierre on the shoulder . "
What a thing to say ! " he exclaimed . "
Paris ? ...
But Paris , Paris ... "
" Paris - the capital of the world , " Pierre finished his remark for him .
The captain looked at Pierre .
He had a habit of stopping short in the middle of his talk and gazing intently with his laughing , kindly eyes .
" Well , if you had n't told me you were Russian , I should have wagered that you were Parisian !
You have that ...
I do n't know what , that ... " and having uttered this compliment , he again gazed at him in silence .
" I have been in Paris .
I spent years there , " said Pierre .
" Oh yes , one sees that plainly .
Paris ! ...
A man who does n't know Paris is a savage .
You can tell a Parisian two leagues off .
You have been to Paris and have remained Russian .
Well , I do n't esteem you the less for it . "
Under the influence of the wine he had drunk , and after the days he had spent alone with his depressing thoughts , Pierre involuntarily enjoyed talking with this cheerful and good - natured man .
" To return to your ladies - I hear they are lovely .
What a wretched idea to go and bury themselves in the steppes when the French army is in Moscow .
What a chance those girls have missed !
Your peasants , now - that 's another thing ; but you civilized people , you ought to know us better than that .
We took Vienna , Berlin , Madrid , Naples , Rome , Warsaw , all the world 's capitals ....
We are feared , but we are loved .
We are nice to know .
And then the Emperor ...
" he began , but Pierre interrupted him .
" The Emperor , " Pierre repeated , and his face suddenly became sad and embarrassed , " is the Emperor ... ? "
" The Emperor ?
He is generosity , mercy , justice , order , genius -
that 's what the Emperor is !
It is I , Ramballe , who tell you so ....
I assure you
I was his enemy eight years ago .
My father was an emigrant count ....
But that man has vanquished me .
He has taken hold of me .
I could not resist the sight of the grandeur and glory with which he has covered France .
So there !
Oh yes , mon cher , he is the greatest man of the ages past or future . "
" Is he in Moscow ? "
Pierre stammered with a guilty look .
The Frenchman looked at his guilty face and smiled .
" No , he will make his entry tomorrow , " he replied , and continued his talk .
This difficulty had arisen chiefly because the hussars did not understand what was said to them in French .
Pierre , who knew German , translated what the German said to the captain and gave the captain 's reply to the W"urttemberg hussar in German .
When he had understood what was said to him , the German submitted and took his men elsewhere .
The captain went out into the porch and gave some orders in a loud voice .
When he returned to the room Pierre was sitting in the same place as before , with his head in his hands .
His face expressed suffering .
He really was suffering at that moment .
When the captain went out and he was left alone , suddenly he came to himself and realized the position he was in .
It was not that Moscow had been taken or that the happy conquerors were masters in it and were patronizing him .
Painful as that was it
was not that which tormented Pierre at the moment .
He was tormented by the consciousness of his own weakness .
The pistol , dagger , and peasant coat were ready .
Napoleon was to enter the town next day .
Pierre still considered that it would be a useful and worthy action to slay the evildoer , but now he felt that he would not do it .
He did not know why , but he felt a foreboding that he would not carry out his intention .
The captain returned to the room , limping slightly and whistling a tune .
The Frenchman 's chatter which had previously amused Pierre now repelled him .
The tune he was whistling , his gait , and the gesture with which he twirled his mustache , all now seemed offensive .
" I will go away immediately .
I wo n't say another word to him , " thought Pierre .
He thought this , but still sat in the same place .
A strange feeling of weakness tied him to the spot ; he wished to get up and go away , but could not do so .
The captain , on the other hand , seemed very cheerful .
He paced up and down the room twice .
His eyes shone and his mustache twitched as if he were smiling to himself at some amusing thought .
" The colonel of those W"urttembergers is delightful , " he suddenly said .
" He 's a German , but a nice fellow all the same ....
But he 's a German . "
He sat down facing Pierre . "
By the way , you know German , then ? "
Pierre looked at him in silence .
" What is the German for ' shelter ' ? "
" Shelter ? "
Pierre repeated .
" The German for shelter is Unterkunft . "
" How do you say it ? " the captain asked quickly and doubtfully .
" Unterkunft , " Pierre repeated .
" Onterkoff , " said the captain and looked at Pierre for some seconds with laughing eyes .
" These Germans are first - rate fools , do n't you think so , Monsieur Pierre ? " he concluded .
" Well , let 's have another bottle of this Moscow Bordeaux , shall we ?
Morel will warm us up another little bottle .
Morel !
" he called out gaily .
Morel brought candles and a bottle of wine .
The captain looked at Pierre by the candlelight and was evidently struck by the troubled expression on his companion 's face .
Ramballe , with genuine distress and sympathy in his face , went up to Pierre and bent over him .
" There now , we 're sad , " said he , touching Pierre 's hand . "
Have I upset you ?
No , really , have you anything against me ? "
he asked Pierre . "
Perhaps it 's the state of affairs ? "
Pierre did not answer , but looked cordially into the Frenchman 's eyes whose expression of sympathy was pleasing to him .
" Honestly , without speaking of what I owe you , I feel friendship for you .
Can I do anything for you ?
Dispose of me .
It is for life and death .
I say it with my hand on my heart ! "
said he , striking his chest .
" Thank you , " said Pierre .
The captain gazed intently at him as he had done when he learned that " shelter " was Unterkunft in German , and his face suddenly brightened .
" Well , in that case , I drink to our friendship ! "
he cried gaily , filling two glasses with wine .
Pierre took one of the glasses and emptied it .
Ramballe emptied his too , again pressed Pierre 's hand , and leaned his elbows on the table in a pensive attitude .
" Yes , my dear friend , " he began , " such is fortune 's caprice .
Who would have said that I should be a soldier and a captain of dragoons in the service of Bonaparte , as we used to call him ?
Yet here I am in Moscow with him .
" But all that is only life 's setting , the real thing is love - love !
Am I not right , Monsieur Pierre ? "
said he , growing animated . "
Another glass ? "
Pierre again emptied his glass and poured himself out a third .
" Oh , women , women ! " and the captain , looking with glistening eyes at Pierre , began talking of love and of his love affairs .
There were very many of these , as one could easily believe , looking at the officer 's handsome , self - satisfied face , and noting the eager enthusiasm with which he spoke of women .
( Ramballe despised both these kinds of love equally : the one he considered the " love of clodhoppers " and the other the " love of simpletons . " )
L'amour which the Frenchman worshiped consisted principally in the unnaturalness of his relation to the woman and in a combination of incongruities giving the chief charm to the feeling .
Thus the captain touchingly recounted the story of his love for a fascinating marquise of thirty - five and at the same time for a charming , innocent child of seventeen , daughter of the bewitching marquise .
Having repeated these words the captain wiped his eyes and gave himself a shake , as if driving away the weakness which assailed him at this touching recollection .
While listening to these love stories his own love for Nat'asha unexpectedly rose to his mind , and going over the pictures of that love in his imagination he mentally compared them with Ramballe 's tales .
Listening to the story of the struggle between love and duty , Pierre saw before his eyes every minutest detail of his last meeting with the object of his love at the S'ukharev water tower .
At the time of that meeting it had not produced an effect upon him - he had not even once recalled it .
But now it seemed to him that that meeting had had in it something very important and poetic .
" Peter Kir'ilovich , come here !
Having finished his tale about the enchanting Polish lady , the captain asked Pierre if he had ever experienced a similar impulse to sacrifice himself for love and a feeling of envy of the legitimate husband .
Challenged by this question Pierre raised his head and felt a need to express the thoughts that filled his mind .
He began to explain that he understood love for a woman somewhat differently .
He said that in all his life he had loved and still loved only one woman , and that she could never be his .
" Tiens ! " said the captain .
Afterwards when he had received a name and wealth he dared not think of her because he loved her too well , placing her far above everything in the world , and especially therefore above himself .
When he had reached this point , Pierre asked the captain whether he understood that .
The captain made a gesture signifying that even if he did not understand it he begged Pierre to continue .
" Plat'onic love , clouds ... " he muttered .
Urged on by Ramballe 's questions he also told what he had at first concealed - his own position and even his name .
When it was late at night they went out together into the street .
The night was warm and light .
To the left of the house on the Pokr'ovka a fire glowed - the first of those that were beginning in Moscow .
To the right and high up in the sky was the sickle of the waning moon and opposite to it hung that bright comet which was connected in Pierre 's heart with his love .
At the gate stood Ger'asim , the cook , and two Frenchmen .
Their laughter and their mutually incomprehensible remarks in two languages could be heard .
They were looking at the glow seen in the town .
There was nothing terrible in the one small , distant fire in the immense city .
Gazing at the high starry sky , at the moon , at the comet , and at the glow from the fire , Pierre experienced a joyful emotion .
" There now , how good it is , what more does one need ? " thought he .
And suddenly remembering his intention he grew dizzy and felt so faint that he leaned against the fence to save himself from falling .
Without taking leave of his new friend , Pierre left the gate with unsteady steps and returning to his room lay down on the sofa and immediately fell asleep .
CHAPTER XXX
The glow of the first fire that began on the second of September was watched from the various roads by the fugitive Muscovites and by the retreating troops , with many different feelings .
The Rost'ov party spent the night at Myt'ishchi , fourteen miles from Moscow .
The next morning they woke late and were again delayed so often that they only got as far as Great Myt'ishchi .
At ten o'clock that evening the Rost'ov family and the wounded traveling with them were all distributed in the yards and huts of that large village .
The Rost'ovs ' servants and coachmen and the orderlies of the wounded officers , after attending to their masters , had supper , fed the horses , and came out into the porches .
In a neighboring hut lay Ra'evski 's adjutant with a fractured wrist .
The awful pain he suffered made him moan incessantly and piteously , and his moaning sounded terrible in the darkness of the autumn night .
He had spent the first night in the same yard as the Rost'ovs .
The countess said she had been unable to close her eyes on account of his moaning , and at Myt'ishchi
she moved into a worse hut simply to be farther away from the wounded man .
In the darkness of the night one of the servants noticed , above the high body of a coach standing before the porch , the small glow of another fire .
One glow had long been visible and everybody knew that it was Little Myt'ishchi burning - set on fire by Mam'onov 's Cossacks .
" But look here , brothers , there 's another fire ! " remarked an orderly .
All turned their attention to the glow .
" But they told us Little Myt'ishchi had been set on fire by Mam'onov 's Cossacks . "
" But that 's not Myt'ishchi , it 's farther away . "
" Look , it must be in Moscow ! "
Two of the gazers went round to the other side of the coach and sat down on its steps .
" It 's more to the left , why , Little Myt'ishchi is over there , and this is right on the other side . "
Several men joined the first two .
" See how it 's flaring , " said one .
" That 's a fire in Moscow : either in the Sushch'evski or the Rog'ozhski quarter . "
No one replied to this remark and for some time they all gazed silently at the spreading flames of the second fire in the distance .
Old Daniel Ter'entich , the count 's valet ( as he was called ) , came up to the group and shouted at M'ishka .
" What are you staring at , you good - for - nothing ? ...
The count will be calling and there 's nobody there ; go and gather the clothes together . "
" I only ran out to get some water , " said M'ishka .
" But what do you think , Daniel Ter'entich ?
Does n't it look as if that glow were in Moscow ?
" remarked one of the footmen .
Daniel Ter'entich made no reply , and again for a long time they were all silent .
The glow spread , rising and falling , farther and farther still .
" God have mercy ....
It 's windy and dry ... " said another voice .
" Just look !
See what it 's doing now .
O Lord !
You can even see the crows flying .
Lord have mercy on us sinners ! "
" They 'll put it out , no fear ! "
" Who 's to put it out ? "
Daniel Ter'entich , who had hitherto been silent , was heard to say .
His voice was calm and deliberate . "
Moscow it is , brothers , " said he . "
Mother Moscow , the white ... " his voice faltered , and he gave way to an old man 's sob .
And it was as if they had all only waited for this to realize the significance for them of the glow they were watching .
Sighs were heard , words of prayer , and the sobbing of the count 's old valet .
CHAPTER XXXI
The valet , returning to the cottage , informed the count that Moscow was burning .
The count donned his dressing gown and went out to look .
S'onya and Madame Schoss , who had not yet undressed , went out with him .
Only Nat'asha and the countess remained in the room .
P'etya was no longer with the family , he had gone on with his regiment which was making for Tr'oitsa .
The countess , on hearing that Moscow was on fire , began to cry .
Nat'asha , pale , with a fixed look , was sitting on the bench under the icons just where she had sat down on arriving and paid no attention to her father 's words .
She was listening to the ceaseless moaning of the adjutant , three houses off .
" Oh , how terrible , " said S'onya returning from the yard chilled and frightened .
" I believe the whole of Moscow will burn , there 's an awful glow !
Nat'asha , do look !
You can see it from the window , " she said to her cousin , evidently wishing to distract her mind .
But Nat'asha looked at her as if not understanding what was said to her and again fixed her eyes on the corner of the stove .
The countess had seldom been so angry with anyone as she was with S'onya .
S'onya had cried and begged to be forgiven and now , as if trying to atone for her fault , paid unceasing attention to her cousin .
" Look , Nat'asha , how dreadfully it is burning ! " said she .
" What 's burning ? " asked Nat'asha .
"
Oh , yes , Moscow . "
" But you did n't see it ! "
" Yes , really I did , " Nat'asha replied in a voice that pleaded to be left in peace .
Both the countess and S'onya understood that , naturally , neither Moscow nor the burning of Moscow nor anything else could seem of importance to Nat'asha .
The count returned and lay down behind the partition .
" You are cold .
You are trembling all over .
You 'd better lie down , " said the countess .
" Lie down ?
All right , I will .
I 'll lie down at once , " said Nat'asha .
When Nat'asha had been told that morning that Prince Andrew was seriously wounded and was traveling with their party , she had at first asked many questions : Where was he going ?
How was he wounded ?
Was it serious ?
And could she see him ?
She was planning something and either deciding or had already decided something in her mind .
The countess knew this , but what it might be she did not know , and this alarmed and tormented her .
" Nat'asha , undress , darling ; lie down on my bed . "
A bed had been made on a bedstead for the countess only .
Madame Schoss and the two girls were to sleep on some hay on the floor .
" No , Mamma , I will lie down here on the floor , " Nat'asha replied irritably and she went to the window and opened it .
Through the open window the moans of the adjutant could be heard more distinctly .
She put her head out into the damp night air , and the countess saw her slim neck shaking with sobs and throbbing against the window frame .
Nat'asha knew it was not Prince Andrew who was moaning .
She knew Prince Andrew was in the same yard as themselves and in a part of the hut across the passage ; but this dreadful incessant moaning made her sob .
The countess exchanged a look with S'onya .
" Lie down , darling ; lie down , my pet , " said the countess , softly touching Nat'asha 's shoulders .
" Come , lie down . "
" Oh , yes ... I 'll lie down at once , " said Nat'asha , and began hurriedly undressing , tugging at the tapes of her petticoat .
Her long , thin , practiced fingers rapidly unplaited , replaited , and tied up her plait .
Her head moved from side to side from habit , but her eyes , feverishly wide , looked fixedly before her .
When her toilet for the night was finished she sank gently onto the sheet spread over the hay on the side nearest the door .
" Nat'asha , you 'd better lie in the middle , " said S'onya .
" I 'll stay here , " muttered Nat'asha .
" Do lie down , " she added crossly , and buried her face in the pillow .
The countess , Madame Schoss , and S'onya undressed hastily and lay down .
The small lamp in front of the icons was the only light left in the room .
For a long time Nat'asha listened attentively to the sounds that reached her from inside and outside the room and did not move .
First she heard her mother praying and sighing and the creaking of her bed under her , then Madame Schoss ' familiar whistling snore and S'onya 's gentle breathing .
Then the countess called to Nat'asha .
Nat'asha did not answer .
" I think she 's asleep , Mamma , " said S'onya softly .
After a short silence the countess spoke again but this time no one replied .
Soon after that Nat'asha heard her mother 's even breathing .
Nat'asha did not move , though her little bare foot , thrust out from under the quilt , was growing cold on the bare floor .
As if to celebrate a victory over everybody , a cricket chirped in a crack in the wall .
A cock crowed far off and another replied near by .
The shouting in the tavern had died down ; only the moaning of the adjutant was heard .
Nat'asha sat up .
" S'onya , are you asleep ?
Mamma ?
" she whispered .
No one replied .
Nat'asha rose slowly and carefully , crossed herself , and stepped cautiously on the cold and dirty floor with her slim , supple , bare feet .
The boards of the floor creaked .
Stepping cautiously from one foot to the other she ran like a kitten the few steps to the door and grasped the cold door handle .
It seemed to her that something heavy was beating rhythmically against all the walls of the room : it was her own heart , sinking with alarm and terror and overflowing with love .
She opened the door and stepped across the threshold and onto the cold , damp earthen floor of the passage .
The cold she felt refreshed her .
With her bare feet she touched a sleeping man , stepped over him , and opened the door into the part of the hut where Prince Andrew lay .
It was dark in there .
In the farthest corner , on a bench beside a bed on which something was lying , stood a tallow candle with a long , thick , and smoldering wick .
From the moment she had been told that morning of Prince Andrew 's wound and his presence there , Nat'asha had resolved to see him .
She did not know why she had to , she knew the meeting would be painful , but felt the more convinced that it was necessary .
All day she had lived only in hope of seeing him that night .
But now that the moment had come she was filled with dread of what she might see .
How was he maimed ?
What was left of him ?
Was he like that incessant moaning of the adjutant 's ?
Yes , he was altogether like that .
In her imagination he was that terrible moaning personified .
When she saw an indistinct shape in the corner , and mistook his knees raised under the quilt for his shoulders , she imagined a horrible body there , and stood still in terror .
But an irresistible impulse drew her forward .
She cautiously took one step and then another , and found herself in the middle of a small room containing baggage .
Another man - Tim'okhin - was lying in a corner on the benches beneath the icons , and two others - the doctor and a valet - lay on the floor .
The valet sat up and whispered something .
Tim'okhin , kept awake by the pain in his wounded leg , gazed with wide - open eyes at this strange apparition of a girl in a white chemise , dressing jacket , and nightcap .
The valet 's sleepy , frightened exclamation , " What do you want ?
What 's the matter ? " made Nat'asha approach more swiftly to what was lying in the corner .
Horribly unlike a man as that body looked , she must see him .
She passed the valet , the snuff fell from the candle wick , and she saw Prince Andrew clearly with his arms outside the quilt , and such as she had always seen him .
She went up to him and with a swift , flexible , youthful movement dropped on her knees .
He smiled and held out his hand to her .
CHAPTER XXXII
Seven days had passed since Prince Andrew found himself in the ambulance station on the field of Borodin'o .
His feverish state and the inflammation of his bowels , which were injured , were in the doctor 's opinion sure to carry him off .
But on the seventh day he ate with pleasure a piece of bread with some tea , and the doctor noticed that his temperature was lower .
He had regained consciousness that morning .
The first night after they left Moscow had been fairly warm and he had remained in the cal`eche , but at Myt'ishchi the wounded man himself asked to be taken out and given some tea .
The pain caused by his removal into the hut had made him groan aloud and again lose consciousness .
When he had been placed on his camp bed he lay for a long time motionless with closed eyes .
Then he opened them and whispered softly : " And the tea ? "
His remembering such a small detail of everyday life astonished the doctor .
He felt Prince Andrew 's pulse , and to his surprise and dissatisfaction found it had improved .
He was dissatisfied because he knew by experience that if his patient did not die now , he would do so a little later with greater suffering .
Tim'okhin , the red - nosed major of Prince Andrew 's regiment , had joined him in Moscow and was being taken along with him , having been wounded in the leg at the battle of Borodin'o .
They were accompanied by a doctor , Prince Andrew 's valet , his coachman , and two orderlies .
They gave Prince Andrew some tea .
He drank it eagerly , looking with feverish eyes at the door in front of him as if trying to understand and remember something .
" I do n't want any more .
Is Tim'okhin here ? " he asked .
Tim'okhin crept along the bench to him .
" I am here , your excellency . "
" How 's your wound ? "
" Mine , sir ?
All right .
But how about you ? "
Prince Andrew again pondered as if trying to remember something .
" Could n't one get a book ? " he asked .
" What book ? "
" The Gospels .
I have n't one . "
The doctor promised to procure it for him and began to ask how he was feeling .
Prince Andrew answered all his questions reluctantly but reasonably , and then said he wanted a bolster placed under him as he was uncomfortable and in great pain .
The doctor and valet lifted the cloak with which he was covered and , making wry faces at the noisome smell of mortifying flesh that came from the wound , began examining that dreadful place .
The doctor was very much displeased about something and made a change in the dressings , turning the wounded man over so that he groaned again and grew unconscious and delirious from the agony .
He kept asking them to get him the book and put it under him .
" What trouble would it be to you ? " he said .
" I have not got one .
Please get it for me and put it under for a moment , " he pleaded in a piteous voice .
The doctor went into the passage to wash his hands .
" You fellows have no conscience , " said he to the valet who was pouring water over his hands .
" For just one moment I did n't look after you ...
It 's such pain , you know , that I wonder how he can bear it . "
" By the Lord Jesus Christ , I thought we had put something under him ! " said the valet .
The first time Prince Andrew understood where he was and what was the matter with him and remembered being wounded and how was when he asked to be carried into the hut after his cal`eche had stopped at Myt'ishchi .
And those thoughts , though now vague and indefinite , again possessed his soul .
He remembered that he had now a new source of happiness and that this happiness had something to do with the Gospels .
That was why he asked for a copy of them .
The uncomfortable position in which they had put him and turned him over again confused his thoughts , and when he came to himself a third time it was in the complete stillness of the night .
Everybody near him was sleeping .
His mind was not in a normal state .
A healthy man usually thinks of , feels , and remembers innumerable things simultaneously , but has the power and will to select one sequence of thoughts or events on which to fix his whole attention .
A healthy man can tear himself away from the deepest reflections to say a civil word to someone who comes in and can then return again to his own thoughts .
But Prince Andrew 's mind was not in a normal state in that respect .
All the powers of his mind were more active and clearer than ever , but they acted apart from his will .
Most diverse thoughts and images occupied him simultaneously .
" A happiness lying beyond material forces , outside the material influences that act on man - a happiness of the soul alone , the happiness of loving .
Every man can understand it , but to conceive it and enjoin it was possible only for God .
But how did God enjoin that law ?
And why was the Son ... ? "
At the same time he felt that above his face , above the very middle of it , some strange airy structure was being erected out of slender needles or splinters , to the sound of this whispered music .
Each time the fly touched his face
it gave him a burning sensation and yet to his surprise it did not destroy the structure , though it knocked against the very region of his face where it was rising .
But besides this there was something else of importance .
It was something white by the door - the statue of a sphinx , which also oppressed him .
That 's enough , please leave off ! "
Prince Andrew painfully entreated someone .
And suddenly thoughts and feelings again swam to the surface of his mind with peculiar clearness and force .
" Yes - love , " he thought again quite clearly . "
I experienced that feeling of love which is the very essence of the soul and does not require an object .
Now again I feel that bliss .
To love one 's neighbors , to love one 's enemies , to love everything , to love God in all His manifestations .
It is possible to love someone dear to you with human love , but an enemy can only be loved by divine love .
That is why I experienced such joy when I felt that I loved that man .
What has become of him ?
Is he alive ? ...
" When loving with human love one may pass from love to hatred , but divine love can not change .
No , neither death nor anything else can destroy it .
It is the very essence of the soul .
Yet how many people have I hated in my life ?
And of them all , I loved and hated none as I did her . "
And he vividly pictured to himself Nat'asha , not as he had done in the past with nothing but her charms which gave him delight , but for the first time picturing to himself her soul .
And he understood her feelings , her sufferings , shame , and remorse .
He now understood for the first time all the cruelty of his rejection of her , the cruelty of his rupture with her . "
If only it were possible for me to see her once more !
Just once , looking into those eyes to say ... "
" Piti - piti - piti and ti - ti and piti - piti - piti boom ! " flopped the fly ....
And his attention was suddenly carried into another world , a world of reality and delirium in which something particular was happening .
And that sphinx had the pale face and shining eyes of the very Nat'asha of whom he had just been thinking .
" Oh , how oppressive this continual delirium is , " thought Prince Andrew , trying to drive that face from his imagination .
But the face remained before him with the force of reality and drew nearer .
Prince Andrew wished to return to that former world of pure thought , but he could not , and delirium drew him back into its domain .
The soft whispering voice continued its rhythmic murmur , something oppressed him and stretched out , and the strange face was before him .
When he came to himself , Nat'asha , that same living Nat'asha whom of all people he most longed to love with this new pure divine love that had been revealed to him , was kneeling before him .
He realized that it was the real living Nat'asha , and he was not surprised but quietly happy .
Nat'asha , motionless on her knees ( she was unable to stir ) , with frightened eyes riveted on him , was restraining her sobs .
Her face was pale and rigid .
Only in the lower part of it something quivered .
Prince Andrew sighed with relief , smiled , and held out his hand .
" You ? " he said .
" How fortunate ! "
With a rapid but careful movement Nat'asha drew nearer to him on her knees and , taking his hand carefully , bent her face over it and began kissing it , just touching it lightly with her lips .
" Forgive me !
" she whispered , raising her head and glancing at him . "
Forgive me ! "
" I love you , " said Prince Andrew .
" Forgive ... ! "
" Forgive what ? " he asked .
" Forgive me for what I ha - ve do - ne ! " faltered Nat'asha in a scarcely audible , broken whisper , and began kissing his hand more rapidly , just touching it with her lips .
" I love you more , better than before , " said Prince Andrew , lifting her face with his hand so as to look into her eyes .
Those eyes , filled with happy tears , gazed at him timidly , compassionately , and with joyous love .
Nat'asha 's thin pale face , with its swollen lips , was more than plain - it was dreadful .
But Prince Andrew did not see that , he saw her shining eyes which were beautiful .
They heard the sound of voices behind them .
Peter the valet , who was now wide awake , had roused the doctor .
" What 's this ? " said the doctor , rising from his bed . "
Please go away , madam ! "
At that moment a maid sent by the countess , who had noticed her daughter 's absence , knocked at the door .
Like a somnambulist aroused from her sleep Nat'asha went out of the room and , returning to her hut , fell sobbing on her bed .
CHAPTER XXXIII
On the third of September Pierre awoke late .
His head was aching , the clothes in which he had slept without undressing felt uncomfortable on his body , and his mind had a dim consciousness of something shameful he had done the day before .
That something shameful was his yesterday 's conversation with Captain Ramballe .
It was eleven by the clock , but it seemed peculiarly dark out of doors .
Pierre rose , rubbed his eyes , and seeing the pistol with an engraved stock which Ger'asim had replaced on the writing table , he remembered where he was and what lay before him that very day .
" Am I not too late ? " he thought .
" No , probably he wo n't make his entry into Moscow before noon . "
Pierre did not allow himself to reflect on what lay before him , but hastened to act .
After arranging his clothes , he took the pistol and was about to go out .
But it then occurred to him for the first time that he certainly could not carry the weapon in his hand through the streets .
It was difficult to hide such a big pistol even under his wide coat .
He could not carry it unnoticed in his belt or under his arm .
Besides , it had been discharged , and he had not had time to reload it . "
Having tied a girdle over his coat and pulled his cap low on his head , Pierre went down the corridor , trying to avoid making a noise or meeting the captain , and passed out into the street .
The conflagration , at which he had looked with so much indifference the evening before , had greatly increased during the night .
Moscow was on fire in several places .
The buildings in Carriage Row , across the river , in the Bazaar and the Povarsk'oy , as well as the barges on the Moskv'a River and the timber yards by the Dorogom'ilov Bridge , were all ablaze .
Pierre 's way led through side streets to the Povarsk'oy and from there to the church of St. Nicholas on the Arb'at , where he had long before decided that the deed should be done .
The gates of most of the houses were locked and the shutters up .
The streets and lanes were deserted .
The air was full of smoke and the smell of burning .
Now and then he met Russians with anxious and timid faces , and Frenchmen with an air not of the city but of the camp , walking in the middle of the streets .
Both the Russians and the French looked at Pierre with surprise .
Besides his height and stoutness , and the strange morose look of suffering in his face and whole figure , the Russians stared at Pierre because they could not make out to what class he could belong .
The French followed him with astonishment in their eyes chiefly because Pierre , unlike all the other Russians who gazed at the French with fear and curiosity , paid no attention to them .
At the gate of one house three Frenchmen , who were explaining something to some Russians who did not understand them , stopped Pierre asking if he did not know French .
Pierre shook his head and went on .
He heard nothing and saw nothing of what went on around him .
He carried his resolution within himself in terror and haste , like something dreadful and alien to him , for , after the previous night 's experience , he was afraid of losing it .
But he was not destined to bring his mood safely to his destination .
Though he heard and saw nothing around him he found his way by instinct and did not go wrong in the side streets that led to the Povarsk'oy .
As Pierre approached that street the smoke became denser and denser - he even felt the heat of the fire .
Occasionally curly tongues of flame rose from under the roofs of the houses .
He met more people in the streets and they were more excited .
But Pierre , though he felt that something unusual was happening around him , did not realize that he was approaching the fire .
He stopped as if awakening from a dream and lifted his head .
By the side of the path , on the dusty dry grass , all sorts of household goods lay in a heap : featherbeds , a samovar , icons , and trunks .
On the ground , beside the trunks , sat a thin woman no longer young , with long , prominent upper teeth , and wearing a black cloak and cap .
This woman , swaying to and fro and muttering something , was choking with sobs .
Two girls of about ten and twelve , dressed in dirty short frocks and cloaks , were staring at their mother with a look of stupefaction on their pale frightened faces .
The youngest child , a boy of about seven , who wore an overcoat and an immense cap evidently not his own , was crying in his old nurse 's arms .
A dirty , barefooted maid was sitting on a trunk , and , having undone her pale - colored plait , was pulling it straight and sniffing at her singed hair .
As soon as she saw Pierre , the woman almost threw herself at his feet .
" Dear people , good Christians , save me , help me , dear friends ... help us , somebody , " she muttered between her sobs .
" My girl ...
My daughter !
My youngest daughter is left behind .
She 's burned !
Ooh !
Was it for this
I nursed you ....
Ooh ! "
" Do n't , Mary Nikol'aevna ! " said her husband to her in a low voice , evidently only to justify himself before the stranger . "
Sister must have taken her , or else where can she be ? " he added .
" Monster ! Villain ! " shouted the woman angrily , suddenly ceasing to weep .
" You have no heart , you do n't feel for your own child !
Another man would have rescued her from the fire .
But this is a monster and neither a man nor a father !
You , honored sir , are a noble man , " she went on , addressing Pierre rapidly between her sobs . "
The fire broke out alongside , and blew our way , the maid called out ' Fire ! '
and we rushed to collect our things .
We ran out just as we were ....
This is what we have brought away ....
The icons , and my dowry bed , all the rest is lost .
We seized the children .
But not Katie !
Ooh !
O Lord ! ...
" and again she began to sob .
" My child , my dear one !
Burned , burned ! "
" But where was she left ? " asked Pierre .
From the expression of his animated face the woman saw that this man might help her .
" Oh , dear sir !
" she cried , seizing him by the legs . "
My benefactor , set my heart at ease ....
An'iska , go , you horrid girl , show him the way ! "
she cried to the maid , angrily opening her mouth and still farther exposing her long teeth .
" Show me the way , show me , I ... I 'll do it , " gasped Pierre rapidly .
The dirty maidservant stepped from behind the trunk , put up her plait , sighed , and went on her short , bare feet along the path .
Pierre felt as if he had come back to life after a heavy swoon .
He held his head higher , his eyes shone with the light of life , and with swift steps he followed the maid , overtook her , and came out on the Povarsk'oy .
The whole street was full of clouds of black smoke .
Tongues of flame here and there broke through that cloud .
A great number of people crowded in front of the conflagration .
In the middle of the street stood a French general saying something to those around him .
Pierre , accompanied by the maid , was advancing to the spot where the general stood , but the French soldiers stopped him .
" On ne passe pas ! " * cried a voice .
* " You ca n't pass ! "
" This way , uncle , " cried the girl .
" We 'll pass through the side street , by the Nik'ulins ' ! "
Pierre turned back , giving a spring now and then to keep up with her .
She ran across the street , turned down a side street to the left , and , passing three houses , turned into a yard on the right .
One of its sides had fallen in , another was on fire , and bright flames issued from the openings of the windows and from under the roof .
As Pierre passed through the fence gate , he was enveloped by hot air and involuntarily stopped .
" Which is it ?
Which is your house ?
" he asked .
" Ooh ! " wailed the girl , pointing to the wing . "
That 's it , that was our lodging .
You 've burned to death , our treasure , Katie , my precious little missy !
Ooh ! "
lamented An'iska , who at the sight of the fire felt that she too must give expression to her feelings .
It had a peculiarly strong effect on him because at the sight of the fire he felt himself suddenly freed from the ideas that had weighed him down .
He felt young , bright , adroit , and resolute .
Pierre looked up and saw at a window of the large house some Frenchmen who had just thrown out the drawer of a chest , filled with metal articles .
Other French soldiers standing below went up to the drawer .
" What does this fellow want ? " shouted one of them referring to Pierre .
" There 's a child in that house .
Have n't you seen a child ? " cried Pierre .
" What 's he talking about ?
" A child ? " shouted a Frenchman from above .
" I did hear something squealing in the garden .
Perhaps it 's his brat that the fellow is looking for .
After all , one must be human , you know .... "
" Where is it ?
Where ? " said Pierre .
" There !
There ! " shouted the Frenchman at the window , pointing to the garden at the back of the house . "
Wait a bit - I'm coming down . "
" Hurry up , you others ! " he called out to his comrades .
" It 's getting hot . "
" There is your child !
Oh , a girl , so much the better ! "
said the Frenchman .
" Good - by , Fatty .
We must be human , we are all mortal you know ! " and the Frenchman with the spot on his cheek ran back to his comrades .
Breathless with joy , Pierre ran to the little girl and was going to take her in his arms .
But seeing a stranger the sickly , scrofulous - looking child , unattractively like her mother , began to yell and run away .
Pierre , however , seized her and lifted her in his arms .
She screamed desperately and angrily and tried with her little hands to pull Pierre 's hands away and to bite them with her slobbering mouth .
Pierre was seized by a sense of horror and repulsion such as he had experienced when touching some nasty little animal .
But he made an effort not to throw the child down and ran with her to the large house .
CHAPTER XXXIV
Having run through different yards and side streets , Pierre got back with his little burden to the Gruz'inski garden at the corner of the Povarsk'oy .
He did not at first recognize the place from which he had set out to look for the child , so crowded was it now with people and goods that had been dragged out of the houses .
Besides Russian families who had taken refuge here from the fire with their belongings , there were several French soldiers in a variety of clothing .
Pierre took no notice of them .
He hurried to find the family of that civil servant in order to restore the daughter to her mother and go to save someone else .
Pierre felt that he had still much to do and to do quickly .
Glowing with the heat and from running , he felt at that moment more strongly than ever the sense of youth , animation , and determination that had come on him when he ran to save the child .
She had now become quiet and , clinging with her little hands to Pierre 's coat , sat on his arm gazing about her like some little wild animal .
He glanced at her occasionally with a slight smile .
He fancied he saw something pathetically innocent in that frightened , sickly little face .
He did not find the civil servant or his wife where he had left them .
He walked among the crowd with rapid steps , scanning the various faces he met .
That very young woman seemed to Pierre the perfection of Oriental beauty , with her sharply outlined , arched , black eyebrows and the extraordinarily soft , bright color of her long , beautiful , expressionless face .
Amid the scattered property and the crowd on the open space , she , in her rich satin cloak with a bright lilac shawl on her head , suggested a delicate exotic plant thrown out onto the snow .
She was sitting on some bundles a little behind the old woman , and looked from under her long lashes with motionless , large , almond - shaped eyes at the ground before her .
Evidently she was aware of her beauty and fearful because of it .
Her face struck Pierre and , hurrying along by the fence , he turned several times to look at her .
When he had reached the fence , still without finding those he sought , he stopped and looked about him .
With the child in his arms his figure was now more conspicuous than before , and a group of Russians , both men and women , gathered about him .
" Have you lost anyone , my dear fellow ?
You 're of the gentry yourself , are n't you ?
Whose child is it ? "
they asked him .
Pierre replied that the child belonged to a woman in a black coat who had been sitting there with her other children , and he asked whether anyone knew where she had gone .
" Why , that must be the Anf'erovs , " said an old deacon , addressing a pockmarked peasant woman .
" Lord have mercy , Lord have mercy ! "
he added in his customary bass .
" The Anf'erovs ?
No , " said the woman .
" They left in the morning .
That must be either Mary Nikol'aevna 's or the Iv'anovs ' ! "
" He says ' a woman , ' and Mary Nikol'aevna is a lady , " remarked a house serf .
" Do you know her ?
She 's thin , with long teeth , " said Pierre .
" That 's Mary Nikol'aevna !
They went inside the garden when these wolves swooped down , " said the woman , pointing to the French soldiers .
" O Lord , have mercy ! " added the deacon .
" Go over that way , they 're there .
It 's she !
She kept on lamenting and crying , " continued the woman .
" It 's she .
Here , this way ! "
But Pierre was not listening to the woman .
He had for some seconds been intently watching what was going on a few steps away .
He was looking at the Armenian family and at two French soldiers who had gone up to them .
One of these , a nimble little man , was wearing a blue coat tied round the waist with a rope .
He had a nightcap on his head and his feet were bare .
The other , whose appearance particularly struck Pierre , was a long , lank , round - shouldered , fair - haired man , slow in his movements and with an idiotic expression of face .
He wore a woman 's loose gown of frieze , blue trousers , and large torn Hessian boots .
The little barefooted Frenchman in the blue coat went up to the Armenians and , saying something , immediately seized the old man by his legs and the old man at once began pulling off his boots .
The other in the frieze gown stopped in front of the beautiful Armenian girl and with his hands in his pockets stood staring at her , motionless and silent .
" Here , take the child ! " said Pierre peremptorily and hurriedly to the woman , handing the little girl to her .
" Give her back to them , give her back ! "
he almost shouted , putting the child , who began screaming , on the ground , and again looking at the Frenchman and the Armenian family .
The old man was already sitting barefoot .
The little Frenchman had secured his second boot and was slapping one boot against the other .
The old man was saying something in a voice broken by sobs , but Pierre caught but a glimpse of this
The beautiful Armenian still sat motionless and in the same attitude , with her long lashes drooping as if she did not see or feel what the soldier was doing to her .
" Let that woman alone ! " exclaimed Pierre hoarsely in a furious voice , seizing the soldier by his round shoulders and throwing him aside .
The soldier fell , got up , and ran away .
But his comrade , throwing down the boots and drawing his sword , moved threateningly toward Pierre .
" Voyons , pas de b^etises ! "
* he cried .
* " Look here , no nonsense ! "
Pierre was in such a transport of rage that he remembered nothing and his strength increased tenfold .
He rushed at the barefooted Frenchman and , before the latter had time to draw his sword , knocked him off his feet and hammered him with his fists .
Shouts of approval were heard from the crowd around , and at the same moment a mounted patrol of French Uhlans appeared from round the corner .
The Uhlans came up at a trot to Pierre and the Frenchman and surrounded them .
Pierre remembered nothing of what happened after that .
He only remembered beating someone and being beaten and finally feeling that his hands were bound and that a crowd of French soldiers stood around him and were searching him .
" Lieutenant , he has a dagger , " were the first words Pierre understood .
" Ah , a weapon ? " said the officer and turned to the barefooted soldier who had been arrested with Pierre . "
All right , you can tell all about it at the court - martial . "
Then he turned to Pierre . "
Do you speak French ? "
Pierre looked around him with bloodshot eyes and did not reply .
His face probably looked very terrible , for the officer said something in a whisper and four more Uhlans left the ranks and placed themselves on both sides of Pierre .
" Do you speak French ?
" the officer asked again , keeping at a distance from Pierre . "
Call the interpreter . "
A little man in Russian civilian clothes rode out from the ranks , and by his clothes and manner of speaking Pierre at once knew him to be a French salesman from one of the Moscow shops .
" He does not look like a common man , " said the interpreter , after a searching look at Pierre .
" Ah , he looks very much like an incendiary , " remarked the officer . "
And ask him who he is , " he added .
" Who are you ? "
asked the interpreter in poor Russian .
" You must answer the chief . "
" I will not tell you who I am .
I am your prisoner - take me ! "
Pierre suddenly replied in French .
" Ah , ah ! " muttered the officer with a frown . "
Well then , march ! "
A crowd had collected round the Uhlans .
Nearest to Pierre stood the pockmarked peasant woman with the little girl , and when the patrol started she moved forward .
" Where are they taking you to , you poor dear ? " said she . "
And the little girl , the little girl , what am I to do with her if she 's not theirs ? " said the woman .
" What does that woman want ? " asked the officer .
Pierre was as if intoxicated .
His elation increased at the sight of the little girl he had saved .
" What does she want ?
" he murmured .
" She is bringing me my daughter whom I have just saved from the flames , " said he .
" Good - by ! "
And without knowing how this aimless lie had escaped him , he went along with resolute and triumphant steps between the French soldiers .
After marching through a number of streets the patrol arrested five more Russian suspects : a small shopkeeper , two seminary students , a peasant , and a house serf , besides several looters .
But of all these various suspected characters , Pierre was considered to be the most suspicious of all .
When they had all been brought for the night to a large house on the Z'ubov Rampart that was being used as a guardhouse , Pierre was placed apart under strict guard .
BOOK TWELVE : 1812
CHAPTER I
There were the same receptions and balls , the same French theater , the same court interests and service interests and intrigues as usual .
Only in the very highest circles were attempts made to keep in mind the difficulties of the actual position .
Stories were whispered of how differently the two Empresses behaved in these difficult circumstances .
It was regarded as a model of ecclesiastical , patriotic eloquence .
Prince Vas'ili himself , famed for his elocution , was to read it .
( He used to read at the Empress ' . )
This reading , as was always the case at Anna P'avlovna 's soirees , had a political significance .
That evening she expected several important personages who had to be made ashamed of their visits to the French theater and aroused to a patriotic temper .
The news of the day in Petersburg was the illness of Countess Bez'ukhova .
" They say the poor countess is very ill .
The doctor says it is angina pectoris . "
" Angina ?
Oh , that 's a terrible illness ! "
" They say that the rivals are reconciled , thanks to the angina ... " and the word angina was repeated with great satisfaction .
" The count is pathetic , they say .
He cried like a child when the doctor told him the case was dangerous . "
" Oh , it would be a terrible loss , she is an enchanting woman . "
" You are speaking of the poor countess ? " said Anna P'avlovna , coming up just then .
" I sent to ask for news , and hear that she is a little better .
Oh , she is certainly the most charming woman in the world , " she went on , with a smile at her own enthusiasm .
" We belong to different camps , but that does not prevent my esteeming her as she deserves .
She is very unfortunate ! "
added Anna P'avlovna .
" Your information may be better than mine , " Anna P'avlovna suddenly and venomously retorted on the inexperienced young man , " but I know on good authority that this doctor is a very learned and able man .
He is private physician to the Queen of Spain . "
" What ?
What 's that ?
" asked Anna P'avlovna , securing silence for the mot , which she had heard before .
And Bil'ibin repeated the actual words of the diplomatic dispatch , which he had himself composed .
" The Emperor returns these Austrian banners , " said Bil'ibin , " friendly banners gone astray and found on a wrong path , " and his brow became smooth again .
" Charming , charming ! "
observed Prince Vas'ili .
" The path to Warsaw , perhaps , " Prince Hippolyte remarked loudly and unexpectedly .
Everybody looked at him , understanding what he meant .
Prince Hippolyte himself glanced around with amused surprise .
He knew no more than the others what his words meant .
During his diplomatic career he had more than once noticed that such utterances were received as very witty , and at every opportunity he uttered in that way the first words that entered his head .
" It may turn out very well , " he thought , " but if not , they 'll know how to arrange matters . "
Everyone became silent .
" Most Gracious Sovereign and Emperor ! "
Prince Vas'ili sternly declaimed , looking round at his audience as if to inquire whether anyone had anything to say to the contrary .
But no one said anything . "
Prince Vas'ili pronounced these last words in a tearful voice .
Bil'ibin attentively examined his nails , and many of those present appeared intimidated , as if asking in what they were to blame .
Anna P'avlovna whispered the next words in advance , like an old woman muttering the prayer at Communion : "
Let the bold and insolent Goliath ...
" she whispered .
Prince Vas'ili continued .
This icon of the Venerable Sergius , the servant of God and zealous champion of old of our country 's weal , is offered to Your Imperial Majesty .
I grieve that my waning strength prevents rejoicing in the sight of your most gracious presence .
I raise fervent prayers to Heaven that the Almighty may exalt the race of the just , and mercifully fulfill the desires of Your Majesty . "
" What force !
What a style ! " was uttered in approval both of reader and of author .
Animated by that address
Anna P'avlovna 's guests talked for a long time of the state of the fatherland and offered various conjectures as to the result of the battle to be fought in a few days .
" You will see , " said Anna P'avlovna , " that tomorrow , on the Emperor 's birthday , we shall receive news .
I have a favorable presentiment ! "
CHAPTER II
Anna P'avlovna 's presentiment was in fact fulfilled .
Next day during the service at the palace church in honor of the Emperor 's birthday , Prince Volk'onski was called out of the church and received a dispatch from Prince Kut'uzov .
It was Kut'uzov 's report , written from Tat'arinova on the day of the battle .
Kut'uzov wrote that the Russians had not retreated a step , that the French losses were much heavier than ours , and that he was writing in haste from the field of battle before collecting full information .
It followed that there must have been a victory .
And at once , without leaving the church , thanks were rendered to the Creator for His help and for the victory .
Anna P'avlovna 's presentiment was justified , and all that morning a joyously festive mood reigned in the city .
Everyone believed the victory to have been complete , and some even spoke of Napoleon 's having been captured , of his deposition , and of the choice of a new ruler for France .
It is very difficult for events to be reflected in their real strength and completeness amid the conditions of court life and far from the scene of action .
General events involuntarily group themselves around some particular incident .
So now the courtiers ' pleasure was based as much on the fact that the news had arrived on the Emperor 's birthday as on the fact of the victory itself .
It was like a successfully arranged surprise .
Mention was made in Kut'uzov 's report of the Russian losses , among which figured the names of T'uchkov , Bagrati'on , and Kut'aysov .
In the Petersburg world this sad side of the affair again involuntarily centered round a single incident : Kut'aysov 's death .
Everybody knew him , the Emperor liked him , and he was young and interesting .
That day everyone met with the words :
" What a wonderful coincidence !
Just during the service .
But what a loss Kut'aysov is !
How sorry I am ! "
" What did I tell about Kut'uzov ? "
Prince Vas'ili now said with a prophet 's pride .
" I always said he was the only man capable of defeating Napoleon . "
But next day no news arrived from the army and the public mood grew anxious .
The courtiers suffered because of the suffering the suspense occasioned the Emperor .
" Fancy the Emperor 's position ! " said they , and instead of extolling Kut'uzov as they had done the day before , they condemned him as the cause of the Emperor 's anxiety .
That day Prince Vas'ili no longer boasted of his prot'eg'e Kut'uzov , but remained silent when the commander in chief was mentioned .
Moreover , toward evening , as if everything conspired to make Petersburg society anxious and uneasy , a terrible piece of news was added .
Countess H'el`ene Bez'ukhova had suddenly died of that terrible malady it had been so agreeable to mention .
It was said that Prince Vas'ili and the old count had turned upon the Italian , but the latter had produced such letters from the unfortunate deceased that they had immediately let the matter drop .
Talk in general centered round three melancholy facts : the Emperor 's lack of news , the loss of Kut'aysov , and the death of H'el`ene .
On the third day after Kut'uzov 's report a country gentleman arrived from Moscow , and news of the surrender of Moscow to the French spread through the whole town .
This was terrible !
What a position for the Emperor to be in !
" I only wonder that the fate of Russia could have been entrusted to such a man . "
As long as this news remained unofficial it was possible to doubt it , but the next day the following communication was received from Count Rostopch'in :
Prince Kut'uzov 's adjutant has brought me a letter in which he demands police officers to guide the army to the Ryaz'an road .
He writes that he is regretfully abandoning Moscow .
Sire !
Kut'uzov 's action decides the fate of the capital and of your empire !
Russia will shudder to learn of the abandonment of the city in which her greatness is centered and in which lie the ashes of your ancestors !
I shall follow the army .
I have had everything removed , and it only remains for me to weep over the fate of my fatherland .
On receiving this dispatch the Emperor sent Prince Volk'onski to Kut'uzov with the following rescript :
Prince Michael Ilari'onovich !
You can yourself imagine the effect this news has had on me , and your silence increases my astonishment .
I am sending this by Adjutant - General Prince Volk'onski , to hear from you the situation of the army and the reasons that have induced you to take this melancholy decision .
CHAPTER III
Nine days after the abandonment of Moscow , a messenger from Kut'uzov reached Petersburg with the official announcement of that event .
This messenger was Michaud , a Frenchman who did not know Russian , but who was quoique ' etranger , russe de coeur et d'^ame , * as he said of himself .
* Though a foreigner , Russian in heart and soul .
The Emperor at once received this messenger in his study at the palace on Stone Island .
* ( 2 )
* Our most gracious sovereign .
* ( 2 ) Whose flames illumined his route .
Though the source of M. Michaud 's chagrin must have been different from that which caused Russians to grieve , he had such a sad face when shown into the Emperor 's study that the latter at once asked :
" Have you brought me sad news , Colonel ? "
" Very sad , sire , " replied Michaud , lowering his eyes with a sigh . "
The abandonment of Moscow . "
" Have they surrendered my ancient capital without a battle ? " asked the Emperor quickly , his face suddenly flushing .
The Emperor listened in silence , not looking at Michaud .
" Has the enemy entered the city ? " he asked .
" Yes , sire , and Moscow is now in ashes .
I left it all in flames , " replied Michaud in a decided tone , but glancing at the Emperor he was frightened by what he had done .
The Emperor began to breathe heavily and rapidly , his lower lip trembled , and tears instantly appeared in his fine blue eyes .
But this lasted only a moment .
He suddenly frowned , as if blaming himself for his weakness , and raising his head addressed Michaud in a firm voice :
" I see , Colonel , from all that is happening , that Providence requires great sacrifices of us ...
I am ready to submit myself in all things to His will ; but tell me , Michaud , how did you leave the army when it saw my ancient capital abandoned without a battle ?
Did you not notice discouragement ? ... "
Seeing that his most gracious ruler was calm once more , Michaud also grew calm , but was not immediately ready to reply to the Emperor 's direct and relevant question which required a direct answer .
" Sire , will you allow me to speak frankly as befits a loyal soldier ? " he asked to gain time .
" Colonel , I always require it , " replied the Emperor .
" Conceal nothing from me , I wish to know absolutely how things are . "
" How is that ? " the Emperor interrupted him , frowning sternly . "
Would misfortune make my Russians lose heart ? ...
Never ! "
Michaud had only waited for this to bring out the phrase he had prepared .
" Sire , " he said , with respectful playfulness , " they are only afraid lest Your Majesty , in the goodness of your heart , should allow yourself to be persuaded to make peace .
They are burning for the combat , " declared this representative of the Russian nation , " and to prove to Your Majesty by the sacrifice of their lives how devoted they are .... "
" Ah ! " said the Emperor reassured , and with a kindly gleam in his eyes , he patted Michaud on the shoulder .
" You set me at ease , Colonel . "
He bent his head and was silent for some time .
Having uttered these words in an agitated voice the Emperor suddenly turned away as if to hide from Michaud the tears that rose to his eyes , and went to the further end of his study .
Having stood there a few moments , he strode back to Michaud and pressed his arm below the elbow with a vigorous movement .
The Emperor 's mild and handsome face was flushed and his eyes gleamed with resolution and anger .
" Colonel Michaud , do not forget what I say to you here , perhaps we may recall it with pleasure someday ...
Napoleon or I , " said the Emperor , touching his breast .
" We can no longer both reign together .
I have learned to know him , and he will not deceive me any more .... "
And the Emperor paused , with a frown .
" Sire ! " said he , " Your Majesty is at this moment signing the glory of the nation and the salvation of Europe ! "
With an inclination of the head the Emperor dismissed him .
CHAPTER IV
The tales and descriptions of that time without exception speak only of the self - sacrifice , patriotic devotion , despair , grief , and the heroism of the Russians .
But it was not really so .
It appears so to us because we see only the general historic interest of that time and do not see all the personal human interests that people had .
Yet in reality those personal interests of the moment so much transcend the general interests that they always prevent the public interest from being felt or even noticed .
Most of the people at that time paid no attention to the general progress of events but were guided only by their private interests , and they were the very people whose activities at that period were most useful .
In historic events the rule forbidding us to eat of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge is specially applicable .
Only unconscious action bears fruit , and he who plays a part in an historic event never understands its significance .
If he tries to realize it his efforts are fruitless .
The more closely a man was engaged in the events then taking place in Russia the less did he realize their significance .
A few days before the battle of Borodin'o , Nicholas received the necessary money and warrants , and having sent some hussars on in advance , he set out with post horses for Vor'onezh .
The commander of the militia was a civilian general , an old man who was evidently pleased with his military designation and rank .
He received Nicholas brusquely ( imagining this to be characteristically military ) and questioned him with an important air , as if considering the general progress of affairs and approving and disapproving with full right to do so .
Nicholas was in such good spirits that this merely amused him .
From the commander of the militia he drove to the governor .
The governor was a brisk little man , very simple and affable .
" You are Count Ily'a Rost'ov 's son ?
My wife was a great friend of your mother 's .
We are at home on Thursdays - today is Thursday , so please come and see us quite informally , " said the governor , taking leave of him .
Immediately on leaving the governor 's , Nicholas hired post horses and , taking his squadron quartermaster with him , drove at a gallop to the landowner , fourteen miles away , who had the stud .
Everything seemed to him pleasant and easy during that first part of his stay in Vor'onezh and , as usually happens when a man is in a pleasant state of mind , everything went well and easily .
In very few words Nicholas bought seventeen picked stallions for six thousand rubles - to serve , as he said , as samples of his remounts .
When he had changed , poured water over his head , and scented himself , Nicholas arrived at the governor 's rather late , but with the phrase " better late than never " on his lips .
The society gathered together at the governor 's was the best in Vor'onezh .
Among the men was an Italian prisoner , an officer of the French army ; and Nicholas felt that the presence of that prisoner enhanced his own importance as a Russian hero .
The Italian was , as it were , a war trophy .
Nicholas felt this , it seemed to him that everyone regarded the Italian in the same light , and he treated him cordially though with dignity and restraint .
The women and girls flirted with him and , from the first day , the people concerned themselves to get this fine young daredevil of an hussar married and settled down .
Among these was the governor 's wife herself , who welcomed Rost'ov as a near relative and called him " Nicholas . "
Catherine Petr'ovna did actually play valses and the ' ecossaise , and dancing began in which Nicholas still further captivated the provincial society by his agility .
His particularly free manner of dancing even surprised them all .
Nicholas was himself rather surprised at the way he danced that evening .
All the evening Nicholas paid attention to a blue - eyed , plump and pleasing little blonde , the wife of one of the provincial officials .
The husband , however , did not seem to share that conviction and tried to behave morosely with Rost'ov .
But the latter 's good - natured na"ivet'e was so boundless that sometimes even he involuntarily yielded to Nicholas ' good humor .
CHAPTER V
Nicholas sat leaning slightly forward in an armchair , bending closely over the blonde lady and paying her mythological compliments with a smile that never left his face .
" Which lady ? "
" A charming lady , a divine one .
Her eyes " ( Nicholas looked at his partner ) " are blue , her mouth coral and ivory ; her figure " ( he glanced at her shoulders ) " like Diana 's .... "
The husband came up and sullenly asked his wife what she was talking about .
" Ah , Nik'ita Iv'anych ! "
cried Nicholas , rising politely , and as if wishing Nik'ita Iv'anych to share his joke , he began to tell him of his intention to elope with a blonde lady .
The husband smiled gloomily , the wife gaily .
The governor 's good - natured wife came up with a look of disapproval .
" Anna Ign'atyevna wants to see you , Nicholas , " said she , pronouncing the name so that Nicholas at once understood that Anna Ign'atyevna was a very important person .
" Come , Nicholas !
You know you let me call you so ? "
" Oh , yes , Aunt .
Who is she ? "
" Anna Ign'atyevna Malv'intseva .
She has heard from her niece how you rescued her ....
Can you guess ? "
" I rescued such a lot of them ! " said Nicholas .
" Her niece , Princess Bolk'onskaya .
She is here in Vor'onezh with her aunt .
Oho !
How you blush .
Why , are ... ? "
" Not a bit !
Please do n't , Aunt ! "
" Very well , very well ! ...
Oh , what a fellow you are ! "
The governor 's wife led him up to a tall and very stout old lady with a blue headdress , who had just finished her game of cards with the most important personages of the town .
This was Malv'intseva , Princess Mary 's aunt on her mother 's side , a rich , childless widow who always lived in Vor'onezh .
When Rost'ov approached her she was standing settling up for the game .
She looked at him and , screwing up her eyes sternly , continued to upbraid the general who had won from her .
" Very pleased , mon cher , " she then said , holding out her hand to Nicholas . "
Pray come and see me . "
Nicholas promised to come and blushed again as he bowed .
At the mention of Princess Mary he experienced a feeling of shyness and even of fear , which he himself did not understand .
" Whom do you mean , Aunt ? " asked Nicholas .
" I will make a match for you with the princess .
Catherine Petr'ovna speaks of Lily , but I say , no - the princess !
Do you want me to do it ?
I am sure your mother will be grateful to me .
What a charming girl she is , really !
And she is not at all so plain , either . "
" Not at all , " replied Nicholas as if offended at the idea .
"
As befits a soldier , Aunt , I do n't force myself on anyone or refuse anything , " he said before he had time to consider what he was saying .
" Well then , remember , this is not a joke ! "
" Of course not ! "
" Yes , yes , " the governor 's wife said as if talking to herself . "
But , my dear boy , among other things you are too attentive to the other , the blonde .
One is sorry for the husband , really .... "
" But what nonsense I have been saying to the governor 's wife ! "
thought Nicholas suddenly at supper .
" She will really begin to arrange a match ... and S'onya ... ? "
And on taking leave of the governor 's wife , when she again smilingly said to him , " Well then , remember !
" he drew her aside .
" But see here , to tell the truth , Aunt ... "
" What is it , my dear ?
Come , let 's sit down here , " said she .
Nicholas suddenly felt a desire and need to tell his most intimate thoughts ( which he would not have told to his mother , his sister , or his friend ) to this woman who was almost a stranger .
" You see , Aunt , Mamma has long wanted me to marry an heiress , but the very idea of marrying for money is repugnant to me . "
" Oh yes , I understand , " said the governor 's wife .
" But Princess Bolk'onskaya - that 's another matter .
I will tell you the truth .
In the first place I like her very much , I feel drawn to her ; and then , after I met her under such circumstances - so strangely , the idea often occurred to me : '
This is fate . '
Especially if you remember that Mamma had long been thinking of it ;
but I had never happened to meet her before ,
somehow it had always happened that we did not meet .
And as long as my sister Nat'asha was engaged to her brother it was of course out of the question for me to think of marrying her .
And it must needs happen that I should meet her just when Nat'asha 's engagement had been broken off ... and then everything ...
So you see ...
I never told this to anyone and never will , only to you . "
The governor 's wife pressed his elbow gratefully .
" You know S'onya , my cousin ?
I love her , and promised to marry her , and will do so ....
So you see there can be no question about- " said Nicholas incoherently and blushing .
" My dear boy , what a way to look at it !
You know S'onya has nothing
and you yourself say your Papa 's affairs are in a very bad way .
And what about your mother ?
It would kill her , that 's one thing .
And what sort of life would it be for S'onya - if she 's a girl with a heart ?
Your mother in despair , and you all ruined ....
No , my dear , you and S'onya ought to understand that . "
Nicholas remained silent .
It comforted him to hear these arguments .
" All the same , Aunt , it is impossible , " he rejoined with a sigh , after a short pause . "
Besides , would the princess have me ?
And besides , she is now in mourning .
How can one think of it ! "
" But you do n't suppose I 'm going to get you married at once ?
There is always a right way of doing things , " replied the governor 's wife .
" What a matchmaker you are , Aunt ... " said Nicholas , kissing her plump little hand .
CHAPTER VI
On reaching Moscow after her meeting with Rost'ov , Princess Mary had found her nephew there with his tutor , and a letter from Prince Andrew giving her instructions how to get to her Aunt Malv'intseva at Vor'onezh .
She was sad .
Now , after a month passed in quiet surroundings , she felt more and more deeply the loss of her father which was associated in her mind with the ruin of Russia .
She was agitated and incessantly tortured by the thought of the dangers to which her brother , the only intimate person now remaining to her , was exposed .
Malv'intseva expressed approval , and the governor 's wife began to speak of Rost'ov in Mary 's presence , praising him and telling how he had blushed when Princess Mary 's name was mentioned .
But Princess Mary experienced a painful rather than a joyful feeling - her mental tranquillity was destroyed , and desires , doubts , self - reproach , and hopes reawoke .
During the two days that elapsed before Rost'ov called , Princess Mary continually thought of how she ought to behave to him .
More than anything she feared lest the confusion she felt might overwhelm her and betray her as soon as she saw him .
" You have met him , Aunt ? " said she in a calm voice , unable herself to understand that she could be outwardly so calm and natural .
Mademoiselle Bourienne , who was in the drawing room , looked at Princess Mary in bewildered surprise .
Herself a consummate coquette , she could not have maneuvered better on meeting a man she wished to attract .
" Either black is particularly becoming to her or she really has greatly improved without my having noticed it .
And above all , what tact and grace ! "
thought Mademoiselle Bourienne .
Had Princess Mary been capable of reflection at that moment , she would have been more surprised than Mademoiselle Bourienne at the change that had taken place in herself .
From the moment she recognized that dear , loved face , a new life force took possession of her and compelled her to speak and act apart from her own will .
From the time Rost'ov entered , her face became suddenly transformed .
For the first time all that pure , spiritual , inward travail through which she had lived appeared on the surface .
Rost'ov saw all this as clearly as if he had known her whole life .
He felt that the being before him was quite different from , and better than , anyone he had met before , and above all better than himself .
Their conversation was very simple and unimportant .
She did not talk about her brother , diverting the conversation as soon as her aunt mentioned Andrew .
Evidently she could speak of Russia 's misfortunes with a certain artificiality , but her brother was too near her heart and she neither could nor would speak lightly of him .
Nicholas noticed this , as he noticed every shade of Princess Mary 's character with an observation unusual to him , and everything confirmed his conviction that she was a quite unusual and extraordinary being .
When a pause occurred during his short visit , Nicholas , as is usual when there are children , turned to Prince Andrew 's little son , caressing him and asking whether he would like to be an hussar .
He took the boy on his knee , played with him , and looked round at Princess Mary .
With a softened , happy , timid look she watched the boy she loved in the arms of the man she loved .
Nicholas also noticed that look and , as if understanding it , flushed with pleasure and began to kiss the boy with good natured playfulness .
For this purpose she arranged a meeting between the young people at the bishop 's house before Mass.
Though Rost'ov told the governor 's wife that he would not make any declaration to Princess Mary , he promised to go .
He knew that after his promise to S'onya it would be what he deemed base to declare his feelings to Princess Mary .
And he knew that he would never act basely .
After meeting Princess Mary , though the course of his life went on externally as before , all his former amusements lost their charm for him and he often thought about her .
But with Princess Mary , to whom they were trying to get him engaged , he could never picture anything of future married life .
If he tried , his pictures seemed incongruous and false .
It made him afraid .
CHAPTER VII
The dreadful news of the battle of Borodin'o , of our losses in killed and wounded , and the still more terrible news of the loss of Moscow reached Vor'onezh in the middle of September .
The conversations he heard seemed to him insincere ; he did not know how to judge all these affairs and felt that only in the regiment would everything again become clear to him .
He made haste to finish buying the horses , and often became unreasonably angry with his servant and squadron quartermaster .
A few days before his departure a special thanksgiving , at which Nicholas was present , was held in the cathedral for the Russian victory .
He stood a little behind the governor and held himself with military decorum through the service , meditating on a great variety of subjects .
When the service was over the governor 's wife beckoned him to her .
" Have you seen the princess ? "
she asked , indicating with a movement of her head a lady standing on the opposite side , beyond the choir .
Nicholas immediately recognized Princess Mary not so much by the profile he saw under her bonnet as by the feeling of solicitude , timidity , and pity that immediately overcame him .
Princess Mary , evidently engrossed by her thoughts , was crossing herself for the last time before leaving the church .
Nicholas looked at her face with surprise .
It was the same face he had seen before , there was the same general expression of refined , inner , spiritual labor , but now it was quite differently lit up .
There was a pathetic expression of sorrow , prayer , and hope in it .
As soon as she heard his voice a vivid glow kindled in her face , lighting up both her sorrow and her joy .
" There is one thing I wanted to tell you , Princess , " said Rost'ov .
" It is that if your brother , Prince Andrew Nikol'aevich , were not living , it would have been at once announced in the Gazette , as he is a colonel . "
The princess looked at him , not grasping what he was saying , but cheered by the expression of regretful sympathy on his face .
" And I have known so many cases of a splinter wound " ( the Gazette said it was a shell ) " either proving fatal at once or being very slight , " continued Nicholas .
" We must hope for the best , and I am sure ... "
Princess Mary interrupted him .
That evening Nicholas did not go out , but stayed at home to settle some accounts with the horse dealers .
Princess Mary had made an agreeable impression on him when he had met her in Smol'ensk province .
His having encountered her in such exceptional circumstances , and his mother having at one time mentioned her to him as a good match , had drawn his particular attention to her .
When he met her again in Vor'onezh
the impression she made on him was not merely pleasing but powerful .
Nicholas had been struck by the peculiar moral beauty he observed in her at this time .
He was , however , preparing to go away and it had not entered his head to regret that he was thus depriving himself of chances of meeting her .
But that day 's encounter in church had , he felt , sunk deeper than was desirable for his peace of mind .
That pale , sad , refined face , that radiant look , those gentle graceful gestures , and especially the deep and tender sorrow expressed in all her features agitated him and evoked his sympathy .
" She must be a wonderful woman .
A real angel ! "
he said to himself .
" Why am I not free ?
Why was I in such a hurry with S'onya ? "
And he involuntarily compared the two : the lack of spirituality in the one and the abundance of it in the other - a spirituality he himself lacked and therefore valued most highly .
He tried to picture what would happen were he free .
How he would propose to her and how she would become his wife .
But no , he could not imagine that .
He felt awed , and no clear picture presented itself to his mind .
Reveries about S'onya had had something merry and playful in them , but to dream of Princess Mary was always difficult and a little frightening .
" How she prayed ! " he thought .
" It was plain that her whole soul was in her prayer .
Yes , that was the prayer that moves mountains , and I am sure her prayer will be answered .
Why do n't I pray for what I want ?
" he suddenly thought .
" What do I want ?
To be free , released from S'onya ...
She was right , " he thought , remembering what the governor 's wife had said : " Nothing but misfortune can come of marrying S'onya .
Muddles , grief for Mamma ... business difficulties ... muddles , terrible muddles !
Besides , I do n't love her - not as I should .
O , God ! release me from this dreadful , inextricable position ! "
he suddenly began to pray . "
No ,
but I am not praying for trifles now
, " he thought as he put his pipe down in a corner , and folding his hands placed himself before the icon .
Softened by memories of Princess Mary he began to pray as he had not done for a long time .
Tears were in his eyes and in his throat when the door opened and Lavr'ushka came in with some papers .
" Blockhead !
Why do you come in without being called ? " cried Nicholas , quickly changing his attitude .
" From the governor , " said Lavr'ushka in a sleepy voice .
" A courier has arrived and there 's a letter for you . "
" Well , all right , thanks .
You can go ! "
Nicholas took the two letters , one of which was from his mother and the other from S'onya .
He recognized them by the handwriting and opened S'onya 's first .
He had read only a few lines when he turned pale and his eyes opened wide with fear and joy .
" No , it 's not possible ! " he cried aloud .
Unable to sit still he paced up and down the room holding the letter and reading it .
This unexpected and , as it seemed to Nicholas , quite voluntary letter from S'onya freed him from the knot that fettered him and from which there had seemed no escape .
Your S'onya
Both letters were written from Tr'oitsa .
The other , from the countess , described their last days in Moscow , their departure , the fire , and the destruction of all their property .
In this letter the countess also mentioned that Prince Andrew was among the wounded traveling with them ; his state was very critical , but the doctor said there was now more hope .
S'onya and Nat'asha were nursing him .
Next day Nicholas took his mother 's letter and went to see Princess Mary .
Neither he nor she said a word about what " Nat'asha nursing him " might mean , but thanks to this letter Nicholas suddenly became almost as intimate with the princess as if they were relations .
The following day he saw Princess Mary off on her journey to Yarosl'avl , and a few days later left to rejoin his regiment .
CHAPTER VIII
The countess let no occasion slip of making humiliating or cruel allusions to S'onya .
" I shall not be at peace till you promise me this . "
She must sacrifice herself for the family that had reared and brought her up .
To sacrifice herself for others was S'onya 's habit .
Her position in the house was such that only by sacrifice could she show her worth , and she was accustomed to this and loved doing it .
But now they wanted her to sacrifice the very thing that constituted the whole reward for her self - sacrifice and the whole meaning of her life .
And for the first time S'onya felt that out of her pure , quiet love for Nicholas a passionate feeling was beginning to grow up which was stronger than principle , virtue , or religion .
The bustle and terror of the Rost'ovs ' last days in Moscow stifled the gloomy thoughts that oppressed S'onya .
She was glad to find escape from them in practical activity .
She knew that Nat'asha loved no one but Prince Andrew and had never ceased to love him .
Despite all the terror of what had happened during those last days and during the first days of their journey , this feeling that Providence was intervening in her personal affairs cheered S'onya .
At the Tr'oitsa monastery the Rost'ovs first broke their journey for a whole day .
Three large rooms were assigned to them in the monastery hostelry , one of which was occupied by Prince Andrew .
The wounded man was much better that day and Nat'asha was sitting with him .
In the next room sat the count and countess respectfully conversing with the prior , who was calling on them as old acquaintances and benefactors of the monastery .
S'onya was there too , tormented by curiosity as to what Prince Andrew and Nat'asha were talking about .
She heard the sound of their voices through the door .
That door opened and Nat'asha came out , looking excited .
Not noticing the monk , who had risen to greet her and was drawing back the wide sleeve on his right arm , she went up to S'onya and took her hand .
" Nat'asha , what are you about ?
Come here ! " said the countess .
Nat'asha went up to the monk for his blessing , and he advised her to pray for aid to God and His saint .
As soon as the prior withdrew , Nat'asha took her friend by the hand and went with her into the unoccupied room .
" S'onya , will he live ?
" she asked .
" S'onya , how happy I am , and how unhappy ! ...
S'onya , dovey , everything is as it used to be .
If only he lives !
He can not ... because ... because ... of ... " and Nat'asha burst into tears .
" Yes ! I knew it !
Thank God ! "
murmured S'onya . "
He will live . "
S'onya was not less agitated than her friend by the latter 's fear and grief and by her own personal feelings which she shared with no one .
Sobbing , she kissed and comforted Nat'asha . "
If only he lives ! " she thought .
Having wept , talked , and wiped away their tears , the two friends went together to Prince Andrew 's door .
Nat'asha opened it cautiously and glanced into the room , S'onya standing beside her at the half - open door .
Prince Andrew was lying raised high on three pillows .
His pale face was calm , his eyes closed , and they could see his regular breathing .
" O , Nat'asha ! "
S'onya suddenly almost screamed , catching her companion 's arm and stepping back from the door .
" What ?
What is it ? " asked Nat'asha .
" It 's that , that ... " said S'onya , with a white face and trembling lips .
Nat'asha softly closed the door and went with S'onya to the window , not yet understanding what the latter was telling her .
" You remember , " said S'onya with a solemn and frightened expression .
" You remember when I looked in the mirror for you ... at Otr'adnoe at Christmas ?
Do you remember what I saw ? "
" Yes , yes ! " cried Nat'asha opening her eyes wide , and vaguely recalling that S'onya had told her something about Prince Andrew whom she had seen lying down .
" You remember ? " S'onya went on . "
I saw it then and told everybody , you and Duny'asha .
She had in fact seen nothing then but had mentioned the first thing that came into her head , but what she had invented then seemed to her now as real as any other recollection .
" Yes , yes , it really was pink ! "
cried Nat'asha , who now thought she too remembered the word pink being used , and saw in this the most extraordinary and mysterious part of the prediction .
" But what does it mean ? " she added meditatively .
" Oh , I do n't know , it is all so strange , " replied S'onya , clutching at her head .
A few minutes later Prince Andrew rang and Nat'asha went to him , but S'onya , feeling unusually excited and touched , remained at the window thinking about the strangeness of what had occurred .
They had an opportunity that day to send letters to the army , and the countess was writing to her son .
" S'onya ! " said the countess , raising her eyes from her letter as her niece passed , " S'onya , wo n't you write to Nicholas ? "
She spoke in a soft , tremulous voice , and in the weary eyes that looked over her spectacles S'onya read all that the countess meant to convey with these words .
Those eyes expressed entreaty , shame at having to ask , fear of a refusal , and readiness for relentless hatred in case of such refusal .
S'onya went up to the countess and , kneeling down , kissed her hand .
" Yes , Mamma , I will write , " said she .
S'onya was softened , excited , and touched by all that had occurred that day , especially by the mysterious fulfillment she had just seen of her vision .
So with a joyful consciousness of performing a magnanimous deed - interrupted several times by the tears that dimmed her velvety black eyes - she wrote that touching letter the arrival of which had so amazed Nicholas .
CHAPTER IX
The officer and soldiers who had arrested Pierre treated him with hostility but yet with respect , in the guardhouse to which he was taken .
In their attitude toward him could still be felt both uncertainty as to who he might be - perhaps a very important person - and hostility as a result of their recent personal conflict with him .
If they noticed anything remarkable about Pierre , it was only his unabashed , meditative concentration and thoughtfulness , and the way he spoke French , which struck them as surprisingly good .
In spite of this he was placed that day with the other arrested suspects , as the separate room he had occupied was required by an officer .
All the Russians confined with Pierre were men of the lowest class and , recognizing him as a gentleman , they all avoided him , more especially as he spoke French .
Pierre felt sad at hearing them making fun of him .
That evening he learned that all these prisoners ( he , probably , among them ) were to be tried for incendiarism .
On the third day he was taken with the others to a house where a French general with a white mustache sat with two colonels and other Frenchmen with scarves on their arms .
As soon as Pierre began to say anything that did not fit in with that aim , the channel was removed and the water could flow to waste .
Pierre felt , moreover , what the accused always feel at their trial , perplexity as to why these questions were put to him .
He had a feeling that it was only out of condescension or a kind of civility that this device of placing a channel was employed .
And so , as they had the power and wish to inculpate him , this expedient of an inquiry and trial seemed unnecessary .
It was evident that any answer would lead to conviction .
When asked what he was doing when he was arrested , Pierre replied in a rather tragic manner that he was restoring to its parents a child he had saved from the flames .
Why had he fought the marauder ?
Pierre answered that he " was protecting a woman , " and that " to protect a woman who was being insulted was the duty of every man ; that ... "
They interrupted him , for this was not to the point .
Why was he in the yard of a burning house where witnesses had seen him ?
He replied that he had gone out to see what was happening in Moscow .
Again they interrupted him : they had not asked where he was going , but why he was found near the fire ?
Who was he ?
they asked , repeating their first question , which he had declined to answer .
Again he replied that he could not answer it .
" Put that down , that 's bad ... very bad , " sternly remarked the general with the white mustache and red flushed face .
On the fourth day fires broke out on the Z'ubovski rampart .
Pierre and thirteen others were moved to the coach house of a merchant 's house near the Crimean bridge .
On his way through the streets Pierre felt stifled by the smoke which seemed to hang over the whole city .
Fires were visible on all sides .
He did not then realize the significance of the burning of Moscow , and looked at the fires with horror .
What marshal this was , Pierre could not learn from the soldiers .
Evidently for them " the marshal " represented a very high and rather mysterious power .
These first days , before the eighth of September when the prisoners were had up for a second examination , were the hardest of all for Pierre .
CHAPTER X
On the eighth of September an officer - a very important one judging by the respect the guards showed him - entered the coach house where the prisoners were .
This officer , probably someone on the staff , was holding a paper in his hand , and called over all the Russians there , naming Pierre as " the man who does not give his name . "
Glancing indolently and indifferently at all the prisoners , he ordered the officer in charge to have them decently dressed and tidied up before taking them to the marshal .
An hour later a squad of soldiers arrived and Pierre with thirteen others was led to the Virgin 's Field .
It was a fine day , sunny after rain , and the air was unusually pure .
The smoke did not hang low as on the day when Pierre had been taken from the guardhouse on the Z'ubovski rampart , but rose through the pure air in columns .
No flames were seen , but columns of smoke rose on all sides , and all Moscow as far as Pierre could see was one vast charred ruin .
On all sides there were waste spaces with only stoves and chimney stacks still standing , and here and there the blackened walls of some brick houses .
Pierre gazed at the ruins and did not recognize districts he had known well .
Here and there he could see churches that had not been burned .
The Kr'emlin , which was not destroyed , gleamed white in the distance with its towers and the belfry of Iv'an the Great .
The domes of the New Convent of the Virgin glittered brightly and its bells were ringing particularly clearly .
These bells reminded Pierre that it was Sunday and the feast of the Nativity of the Virgin .
But there seemed to be no one to celebrate this holiday : everywhere were blackened ruins , and the few Russians to be seen were tattered and frightened people who tried to hide when they saw the French .
But no :
Pierre felt himself to be an insignificant chip fallen among the wheels of a machine whose action he did not understand but which was working well .
He and the other prisoners were taken to the right side of the Virgin 's Field , to a large white house with an immense garden not far from the convent .
They were taken to the entrance and led into the house one by one .
Pierre was the sixth to enter .
He was conducted through a glass gallery , an anteroom , and a hall , which were familiar to him , into a long low study at the door of which stood an adjutant .
Davout , spectacles on nose , sat bent over a table at the further end of the room .
Pierre went close up to him , but Davout , evidently consulting a paper that lay before him , did not look up .
Without raising his eyes , he said in a low voice :
" Who are you ? "
Pierre was silent because he was incapable of uttering a word .
To him Davout was not merely a French general , but a man notorious for his cruelty .
He did not venture to repeat what he had said at his first examination , yet to disclose his rank and position was dangerous and embarrassing .
So he was silent .
But before he had decided what to do , Davout raised his head , pushed his spectacles back on his forehead , screwed up his eyes , and looked intently at him .
" I know that man , " he said in a cold , measured tone , evidently calculated to frighten Pierre .
The chill that had been running down Pierre 's back now seized his head as in a vise .
" You can not know me , General , I have never seen you ... "
" He is a Russian spy , " Davout interrupted , addressing another general who was present , but whom Pierre had not noticed .
Davout turned away .
With an unexpected reverberation in his voice Pierre rapidly began :
" No , monseigneur , " he said , suddenly remembering that Davout was a duke . "
No , monseigneur , you can not have known me .
I am a militia officer and have not quitted Moscow . "
" Your name ? " asked Davout .
" Bez'ukhov . "
" What proof have I that you are not lying ? "
" Monseigneur ! " exclaimed Pierre , not in an offended but in a pleading voice .
Davout looked up and gazed intently at him .
For some seconds they looked at one another , and that look saved Pierre .
Apart from conditions of war and law , that look established human relations between the two men .
At that moment an immense number of things passed dimly through both their minds , and they realized that they were both children of humanity and were brothers .
He reflected for a moment .
" How can you show me that you are telling the truth ? " said Davout coldly .
Pierre remembered Ramballe , and named him and his regiment and the street where the house was .
" You are not what you say , " returned Davout .
In a trembling , faltering voice Pierre began adducing proofs of the truth of his statements .
But at that moment an adjutant entered and reported something to Davout .
Davout brightened up at the news the adjutant brought , and began buttoning up his uniform .
It seemed that he had quite forgotten Pierre .
When the adjutant reminded him of the prisoner , he jerked his head in Pierre 's direction with a frown and ordered him to be led away .
But where they were to take him Pierre did not know : back to the coach house or to the place of execution his companions had pointed out to him as they crossed the Virgin 's Field .
He turned his head and saw that the adjutant was putting another question to Davout .
" Yes , of course ! " replied Davout , but what this " yes " meant , Pierre did not know .
Pierre could not afterwards remember how he went , whether it was far , or in which direction .
His faculties were quite numbed , he was stupefied , and noticing nothing around him went on moving his legs as the others did till they all stopped and he stopped too .
The only thought in his mind at that time was : who was it that had really sentenced him to death ?
Not the men on the commission that had first examined him - not one of them wished to or , evidently , could have done it .
It was not Davout , who had looked at him in so human a way .
In another moment Davout would have realized that he was doing wrong , but just then the adjutant had come in and interrupted him .
The adjutant , also , had evidently had no evil intent though he might have refrained from coming in .
Then who was executing him , killing him , depriving him of life - him , Pierre , with all his memories , aspirations , hopes , and thoughts ?
Who was doing this ?
And Pierre felt that it was no one .
It was a system - a concurrence of circumstances .
A system of some sort was killing him - Pierre - depriving him of life , of everything , annihilating him .
CHAPTER XI
From Prince Shcherb'atov 's house the prisoners were led straight down the Virgin 's Field , to the left of the nunnery , as far as a kitchen garden in which a post had been set up .
Beyond that post a fresh pit had been dug in the ground , and near the post and the pit a large crowd stood in a semicircle .
The crowd consisted of a few Russians and many of Napoleon 's soldiers who were not on duty - Germans , Italians , and Frenchmen , in a variety of uniforms .
To the right and left of the post stood rows of French troops in blue uniforms with red epaulets and high boots and shakos .
The prisoners were placed in a certain order , according to the list ( Pierre was sixth ) , and were led to the post .
Several drums suddenly began to beat on both sides of them , and at that sound Pierre felt as if part of his soul had been torn away .
He lost the power of thinking or understanding .
He could only hear and see .
And he had only one wish - that the frightful thing that had to happen should happen quickly .
Pierre looked round at his fellow prisoners and scrutinized them .
The two first were convicts with shaven heads .
One was tall and thin , the other dark , shaggy , and sinewy , with a flat nose .
The third was a domestic serf , about forty - five years old , with grizzled hair and a plump , well - nourished body .
The fourth was a peasant , a very handsome man with a broad , light - brown beard and black eyes .
The fifth was a factory hand , a thin , sallow - faced lad of eighteen in a loose coat .
Pierre heard the French consulting whether to shoot them separately or two at a time . "
In couples , " replied the officer in command in a calm voice .
A French official wearing a scarf came up to the right of the row of prisoners and read out the sentence in Russian and in French .
Then two pairs of Frenchmen approached the criminals and at the officer 's command took the two convicts who stood first in the row .
The convicts stopped when they reached the post and , while sacks were being brought , looked dumbly around as a wounded beast looks at an approaching huntsman .
One crossed himself continually , the other scratched his back and made a movement of the lips resembling a smile .
With hurried hands the soldiers blindfolded them , drawing the sacks over their heads , and bound them to the post .
Twelve sharpshooters with muskets stepped out of the ranks with a firm regular tread and halted eight paces from the post .
Pierre turned away to avoid seeing what was going to happen .
Suddenly a crackling , rolling noise was heard which seemed to him louder than the most terrific thunder , and he looked round .
There was some smoke , and the Frenchmen were doing something near the pit , with pale faces and trembling hands .
Two more prisoners were led up .
They could not believe it because they alone knew what their life meant to them , and so they neither understood nor believed that it could be taken from them .
Pierre , breathing heavily , looked around as if asking what it meant .
The same question was expressed in all the looks that met his .
On the faces of all the Russians and of the French soldiers and officers without exception , he read the same dismay , horror , and conflict that were in his own heart . "
But who , after all , is doing this ?
They are all suffering as I am .
Who then is it ?
Who ? " flashed for an instant through his mind .
" Sharpshooters of the 86th , forward ! " shouted someone .
The fifth prisoner , the one next to Pierre , was led away - alone .
Pierre did not understand that he was saved , that he and the rest had been brought there only to witness the execution .
With ever - growing horror , and no sense of joy or relief , he gazed at what was taking place .
The fifth man was the factory lad in the loose cloak .
The moment they laid hands on him he sprang aside in terror and clutched at Pierre .
( Pierre shuddered and shook himself free . )
The lad was unable to walk .
They dragged him along , holding him up under the arms , and he screamed .
When they got him to the post he grew quiet , as if he suddenly understood something .
Pierre was no longer able to turn away and close his eyes .
His curiosity and agitation , like that of the whole crowd , reached the highest pitch at this fifth murder .
Like the others this fifth man seemed calm ; he wrapped his loose cloak closer and rubbed one bare foot with the other .
Pierre did not take his eyes from him and did not miss his slightest movement .
Probably a word of command was given and was followed by the reports of eight muskets ; but try as he would Pierre could not afterwards remember having heard the slightest sound of the shots .
Pierre ran up to the post .
No one hindered him .
Pale , frightened people were doing something around the workman .
The lower jaw of an old Frenchman with a thick mustache trembled as he untied the ropes .
The body collapsed .
The soldiers dragged it awkwardly from the post and began pushing it into the pit .
They all plainly and certainly knew that they were criminals who must hide the traces of their guilt as quickly as possible .
Pierre glanced into the pit and saw that the factory lad was lying with his knees close up to his head and one shoulder higher than the other .
That shoulder rose and fell rhythmically and convulsively , but spadefuls of earth were already being thrown over the whole body .
One of the soldiers , evidently suffering , shouted gruffly and angrily at Pierre to go back .
But Pierre did not understand him and remained near the post , and no one drove him away .
When the pit had been filled up a command was given .
Pierre was taken back to his place , and the rows of troops on both sides of the post made a half turn and went past it at a measured pace .
The twenty - four sharpshooters with discharged muskets , standing in the center of the circle , ran back to their places as the companies passed by .
Pierre gazed now with dazed eyes at these sharpshooters who ran in couples out of the circle .
All but one rejoined their companies .
This one , a young soldier , his face deadly pale , his shako pushed back , and his musket resting on the ground , still stood near the pit at the spot from which he had fired .
He swayed like a drunken man , taking some steps forward and back to save himself from falling .
An old , noncommissioned officer ran out of the ranks and taking him by the elbow dragged him to his company .
The crowd of Russians and Frenchmen began to disperse .
They all went away silently and with drooping heads .
" That will teach them to start fires , " said one of the Frenchmen .
Pierre glanced round at the speaker and saw that it was a soldier who was trying to find some relief after what had been done , but was not able to do so .
Without finishing what he had begun to say he made a hopeless movement with his arm and went away .
CHAPTER XII
After the execution Pierre was separated from the rest of the prisoners and placed alone in a small , ruined , and befouled church .
Toward evening a noncommissioned officer entered with two soldiers and told him that he had been pardoned and would now go to the barracks for the prisoners of war .
Without understanding what was said to him , Pierre got up and went with the soldiers .
They took him to the upper end of the field , where there were some sheds built of charred planks , beams , and battens , and led him into one of them .
In the darkness some twenty different men surrounded Pierre .
He looked at them without understanding who they were , why they were there , or what they wanted of him .
He heard what they said , but did not understand the meaning of the words and made no kind of deduction from or application of them .
He replied to questions they put to him , but did not consider who was listening to his replies , nor how they would understand them .
He looked at their faces and figures , but they all seemed to him equally meaningless .
Though he did not acknowledge it to himself , his faith in the right ordering of the universe , in humanity , in his own soul , and in God , had been destroyed .
He had experienced this before , but never so strongly as now .
But now he felt that the universe had crumbled before his eyes and only meaningless ruins remained , and this not by any fault of his own .
He felt that it was not in his power to regain faith in the meaning of life .
Around him in the darkness men were standing and evidently something about him interested them greatly .
They were telling him something and asking him something .
Then they led him away somewhere , and at last he found himself in a corner of the shed among men who were laughing and talking on all sides .
" Well , then , mates ... that very prince who ... " some voice at the other end of the shed was saying , with a strong emphasis on the word who .
Sitting silent and motionless on a heap of straw against the wall , Pierre sometimes opened and sometimes closed his eyes .
And he opened his eyes again and stared vacantly into the darkness around him .
Beside him in a stooping position sat a small man of whose presence he was first made aware by a strong smell of perspiration which came from him every time he moved .
This man was doing something to his legs in the darkness , and though Pierre could not see his face he felt that the man continually glanced at him .
On growing used to the darkness Pierre saw that the man was taking off his leg bands , and the way he did it aroused Pierre 's interest .
Having unwound the string that tied the band on one leg , he carefully coiled it up and immediately set to work on the other leg , glancing up at Pierre .
While one hand hung up the first string the other was already unwinding the band on the second leg .
In this way , having carefully removed the leg bands by deft circular motions of his arm following one another uninterruptedly , the man hung the leg bands up on some pegs fixed above his head .
" You 've seen a lot of trouble , sir , eh ? " the little man suddenly said .
And there was so much kindliness and simplicity in his singsong voice that Pierre tried to reply , but his jaw trembled and he felt tears rising to his eyes .
The little fellow , giving Pierre no time to betray his confusion , instantly continued in the same pleasant tones :
" Eh , lad , do n't fret ! " said he , in the tender singsong caressing voice old Russian peasant women employ .
" Do n't fret , friend-'suffer an hour , live for an age ! '
that 's how it is , my dear fellow .
And here we live , thank heaven , without offense .
" Eh , you rascal ! "
Pierre heard the same kind voice saying at the other end of the shed . "
So you 've come , you rascal ?
She remembers ...
Now , now , that 'll do ! "
And the soldier , pushing away a little dog that was jumping up at him , returned to his place and sat down .
In his hands he had something wrapped in a rag .
" Here , eat a bit , sir , " said he , resuming his former respectful tone as he unwrapped and offered Pierre some baked potatoes .
" We had soup for dinner and the potatoes are grand ! "
Pierre had not eaten all day and the smell of the potatoes seemed extremely pleasant to him .
He thanked the soldier and began to eat .
" Well , are they all right ? " said the soldier with a smile .
" You should do like this . "
He took a potato , drew out his clasp knife , cut the potato into two equal halves on the palm of his hand , sprinkled some salt on it from the rag , and handed it to Pierre .
" The potatoes are grand ! " he said once more .
" Eat some like that ! "
Pierre thought he had never eaten anything that tasted better .
" Oh , I 'm all right , " said he , " but why did they shoot those poor fellows ?
The last one was hardly twenty . "
" Tss , tt ... ! " said the little man . "
Ah , what a sin ... what a sin ! "
he added quickly , and as if his words were always waiting ready in his mouth and flew out involuntarily he went on : " How was it , sir , that you stayed in Moscow ? "
" I did n't think they would come so soon .
I stayed accidentally , " replied Pierre .
" And how did they arrest you , dear lad ?
At your house ? "
" No , I went to look at the fire , and they arrested me there , and tried me as an incendiary . "
" Where there 's law there 's injustice , " put in the little man .
" And have you been here long ? "
Pierre asked as he munched the last of the potato .
" I ?
It was last Sunday they took me , out of a hospital in Moscow . "
" Why , are you a soldier then ? "
" Yes , we are soldiers of the ' Apsheron regiment .
I was dying of fever .
We were n't told anything .
There were some twenty of us lying there .
We had no idea , never guessed at all . "
" And do you feel sad here ? "
Pierre inquired .
" How can one help it , lad ?
My name is Plat'on , and the surname is Karat'aev , " he added , evidently wishing to make it easier for Pierre to address him .
" They call me ' little falcon ' in the regiment .
How is one to help feeling sad ?
Moscow - she 's the mother of cities .
How can one see all this and not feel sad ?
But ' the maggot gnaws the cabbage , yet dies first ' ; that 's what the old folks used to tell us , " he added rapidly .
" What ?
What did you say ? " asked Pierre .
" Who ?
I ? " said Karat'aev .
" I say things happen not as we plan but as God judges , " he replied , thinking that he was repeating what he had said before , and immediately continued :
" Well , and you , have you a family estate , sir ?
And a house ?
So you have abundance , then ?
And a housewife ?
And your old parents , are they still living ?
" he asked .
And though it was too dark for Pierre to see , he felt that a suppressed smile of kindliness puckered the soldier 's lips as he put these questions .
He seemed grieved that Pierre had no parents , especially that he had no mother .
" A wife for counsel , a mother - in - law for welcome , but there 's none as dear as one 's own mother ! " said he . "
Well , and have you little ones ? "
he went on asking .
Again Pierre 's negative answer seemed to distress him , and he hastened to add :
" Never mind !
You 're young folks yet , and please God may still have some .
The great thing is to live in harmony .... "
" But it 's all the same now , " Pierre could not help saying .
" Ah , my dear fellow ! "
rejoined Karat'aev , " never decline a prison or a beggar 's sack ! "
He seated himself more comfortably and coughed , evidently preparing to tell a long story .
" Well , my dear fellow , I was still living at home , " he began .
" We had a well - to - do homestead , plenty of land , we peasants lived well and our house was one to thank God for .
When Father and we went out mowing there were seven of us .
We lived well .
We were real peasants .
It so happened ... "
" Well , lad , " and a smile changed the tone of his voice " we thought it was a misfortune
but it turned out a blessing !
If it had not been for my sin , my brother would have had to go as a soldier .
But he , my younger brother , had five little ones , while I , you see , only left a wife behind .
We had a little girl , but God took her before I went as a soldier .
I come home on leave
and I 'll tell you how it was
, I look and see that they are living better than before .
The yard full of cattle , the women at home , two brothers away earning wages , and only Michael the youngest , at home .
Father , he says , ' All my children are the same to me : it hurts the same whichever finger gets bitten .
But if Plat'on had n't been shaved for a soldier , Michael would have had to go . '
called us all to him and , will you believe it , placed us in front of the icons . '
Michael , ' he says , ' come here and bow down to his feet ; and you , young woman , you bow down too ; and you , grandchildren , also bow down before him !
Do you understand ? '
he says .
That 's how it is , dear fellow .
Fate looks for a head .
But we are always judging , ' that 's not well - that 's not right ! '
Our luck is like water in a dragnet : you pull at it and it bulges , but when you 've drawn it out it 's empty !
That 's how it is . "
And Plat'on shifted his seat on the straw .
After a short silence he rose .
" Well , I think you must be sleepy , " said he , and began rapidly crossing himself and repeating :
" Lord Jesus Christ , holy Saint Nicholas , Frola and Lavra !
Lord Jesus Christ , holy Saint Nicholas , Frola and Lavra !
Lord Jesus Christ , have mercy on us and save us ! "
he concluded , then bowed to the ground , got up , sighed , and sat down again on his heap of straw .
" That 's the way .
Lay me down like a stone , O God , and raise me up like a loaf , " he muttered as he lay down , pulling his coat over him .
" What prayer was that you were saying ? " asked Pierre .
" Eh ? " murmured Plat'on , who had almost fallen asleep .
" What was I saying ?
I was praying .
Do n't you pray ? "
" Yes , I do , " said Pierre .
" But what was that you said : Frola and Lavra ? "
" Well , of course , " replied Plat'on quickly , " the horses ' saints .
One must pity the animals too .
Eh , the rascal !
Now you 've curled up and got warm , you daughter of a bitch ! "
said Karat'aev , touching the dog that lay at his feet , and again turning over he fell asleep immediately .
Sounds of crying and screaming came from somewhere in the distance outside , and flames were visible through the cracks of the shed , but inside it was quiet and dark .
CHAPTER XIII
Twenty - three soldiers , three officers , and two officials were confined in the shed in which Pierre had been placed and where he remained for four weeks .
When Pierre remembered them afterwards they all seemed misty figures to him except Plat'on Karat'aev , who always remained in his mind a most vivid and precious memory and the personification of everything Russian , kindly , and round .
Plat'on Karat'aev must have been fifty , judging by his stories of campaigns he had been in , told as by an old soldier .
He did not himself know his age and was quite unable to determine it .
His face , despite its fine , rounded wrinkles , had an expression of innocence and youth , his voice was pleasant and musical .
But the chief peculiarity of his speech was its directness and appositeness .
It was evident that he never considered what he had said or was going to say , and consequently the rapidity and justice of his intonation had an irresistible persuasiveness .
His physical strength and agility during the first days of his imprisonment were such that he seemed not to know what fatigue and sickness meant .
He could do everything , not very well but not badly .
He baked , cooked , sewed , planed , and mended boots .
He was always busy , and only at night allowed himself conversation - of which he was fond - and songs .
" A soldier on leave - a shirt outside breeches , " he would say .
He did not like talking about his life as a soldier , though he did not complain , and often mentioned that he had not been flogged once during the whole of his army service .
When he related anything it was generally some old and evidently precious memory of his " Christian " life , as he called his peasant existence .
He would often say the exact opposite of what he had said on a previous occasion , yet both would be right .
He liked to hear the folk tales one of the soldiers used to tell of an evening ( they were always the same ) , but most of all he liked to hear stories of real life .
He would smile joyfully when listening to such stories , now and then putting in a word or asking a question to make the moral beauty of what he was told clear to himself .
And Pierre began to feel in the same way toward Karat'aev .
To all the other prisoners Plat'on Karat'aev seemed a most ordinary soldier .
They called him " little falcon " or " Plat'osha , " chaffed him good - naturedly , and sent him on errands .
But to Pierre he always remained what he had seemed that first night : an unfathomable , rounded , eternal personification of the spirit of simplicity and truth .
Plat'on Karat'aev knew nothing by heart except his prayers .
When he began to speak he seemed not to know how he would conclude .
He did not , and could not , understand the meaning of words apart from their context .
Every word and action of his was the manifestation of an activity unknown to him , which was his life .
But his life , as he regarded it , had no meaning as a separate thing .
It had meaning only as part of a whole of which he was always conscious .
His words and actions flowed from him as evenly , inevitably , and spontaneously as fragrance exhales from a flower .
He could not understand the value or significance of any word or deed taken separately .
CHAPTER XIV
That she had not heard from Prince Andrew himself , Princess Mary attributed to his being too weak to write or to his considering the long journey too hard and too dangerous for her and his son .
In a few days Princess Mary was ready to start .
Her equipages were the huge family coach in which she had traveled to Vor'onezh , a semiopen trap , and a baggage cart .
With her traveled Mademoiselle Bourienne , little Nicholas and his tutor , her old nurse , three maids , T'ikhon , and a young footman and courier her aunt had sent to accompany her .
During this difficult journey Mademoiselle Bourienne , Dessalles , and Princess Mary 's servants were astonished at her energy and firmness of spirit .
She went to bed later and rose earlier than any of them , and no difficulties daunted her .
Thanks to her activity and energy , which infected her fellow travelers , they approached Yarosl'avl by the end of the second week .
The last days of her stay in Vor'onezh had been the happiest of her life .
Her love for Rost'ov no longer tormented or agitated her .
It filled her whole soul , had become an integral part of herself , and she no longer struggled against it .
Latterly she had become convinced that she loved and was beloved , though she never said this definitely to herself in words .
She had become convinced of it at her last interview with Nicholas , when he had come to tell her that her brother was with the Rost'ovs .
She knew that she loved for the first and only time in her life and felt that she was beloved , and was happy in regard to it .
That feeling was so strong at the moment of leaving Vor'onezh that those who saw her off , as they looked at her careworn , despairing face , felt sure she would fall ill on the journey .
But the very difficulties and preoccupations of the journey , which she took so actively in hand , saved her for a while from her grief and gave her strength .
As always happens when traveling , Princess Mary thought only of the journey itself , forgetting its object .
But as she approached Yarosl'avl the thought of what might await her there - not after many days , but that very evening - again presented itself to her and her agitation increased to its utmost limit .
" I have found out everything , your excellency : the Rost'ovs are staying at the merchant
Br'onnikov 's house , in the Square not far from here , right above the V'olga , " said the courier .
Princess Mary looked at him with frightened inquiry , not understanding why he did not reply to what she chiefly wanted to know : how was her brother ?
Mademoiselle Bourienne put that question for her .
" How is the prince ? " she asked .
" His excellency is staying in the same house with them . "
" Then he is alive , " thought Princess Mary , and asked in a low voice : " How is he ? "
" The servants say he is still the same . "
The carriage steps clattered as they were let down .
The carriage door was opened .
On the left there was water - a great river - and on the right a porch .
There were people at the entrance : servants , and a rosy girl with a large plait of black hair , smiling as it seemed to Princess Mary in an unpleasantly affected way .
( This was S'onya . )
Princess Mary ran up the steps .
This was the countess .
She embraced Princess Mary and kissed her .
" Mon enfant ! "
she muttered , " je vous aime et vous connais depuis longtemps . " *
* " My child !
I love you and have known you a long time . "
Despite her excitement , Princess Mary realized that this was the countess and that it was necessary to say something to her .
Hardly knowing how she did it , she contrived to utter a few polite phrases in French in the same tone as those that had been addressed to her , and asked : " How is he ? "
" The doctor says that he is not in danger , " said the countess , but as she spoke she raised her eyes with a sigh , and her gesture conveyed a contradiction of her words .
" Where is he ?
Can I see him - can I ? " asked the princess .
" One moment , Princess , one moment , my dear !
Is this his son ? " said the countess , turning to little Nicholas who was coming in with Dessalles .
" There will be room for everybody , this is a big house .
Oh , what a lovely boy ! "
The countess took Princess Mary into the drawing room , where S'onya was talking to Mademoiselle Bourienne .
The countess caressed the boy , and the old count came in and welcomed the princess .
He had changed very much since Princess Mary had last seen him .
Then he had been a brisk , cheerful , self - assured old man ; now he seemed a pitiful , bewildered person .
While talking to Princess Mary he continually looked round as if asking everyone whether he was doing the right thing .
She knew it to be necessary , and though it was hard for her she was not vexed with these people .
" This is my niece , " said the count , introducing S'onya-"You do n't know her , Princess ? "
Princess Mary turned to S'onya and , trying to stifle the hostile feeling that arose in her toward the girl , she kissed her .
But she felt oppressed by the fact that the mood of everyone around her was so far from what was in her own heart .
" Where is he ? " she asked again , addressing them all .
" He is downstairs .
Nat'asha is with him , " answered S'onya , flushing .
" We have sent to ask .
I think you must be tired , Princess . "
Tears of vexation showed themselves in Princess Mary 's eyes .
She turned away and was about to ask the countess again how to go to him , when light , impetuous , and seemingly buoyant steps were heard at the door .
The princess looked round and saw Nat'asha coming in , almost running -
that Nat'asha whom she had liked so little at their meeting in Moscow long since .
But hardly had the princess looked at Nat'asha 's face before she realized that here was a real comrade in her grief , and consequently a friend .
She ran to meet her , embraced her , and began to cry on her shoulder .
It was plain that at that moment there was in Nat'asha 's heart no thought of herself or of her own relations with Prince Andrew .
Princess Mary , with her acute sensibility , understood all this at the first glance at Nat'asha 's face , and wept on her shoulder with sorrowful pleasure .
" Come , come to him , Mary , " said Nat'asha , leading her into the other room .
Princess Mary raised her head , dried her eyes , and turned to Nat'asha .
She felt that from her she would be able to understand and learn everything .
" How ... " she began her question but stopped short .
She felt that it was impossible to ask , or to answer , in words .
Nat'asha 's face and eyes would have to tell her all more clearly and profoundly .
And suddenly , Nat'asha 's lips twitched , ugly wrinkles gathered round her mouth , and covering her face with her hands she burst into sobs .
Princess Mary understood .
But she still hoped , and asked , in words she herself did not trust :
" But how is his wound ?
What is his general condition ? "
" You , you ... will see , " was all Nat'asha could say .
They sat a little while downstairs near his room till they had left off crying and were able to go to him with calm faces .
" How has his whole illness gone ?
Is it long since he grew worse ?
When did this happen ? "
Princess Mary inquired .
Nat'asha told her that at first there had been danger from his feverish condition and the pain he suffered , but at Tr'oitsa that had passed and the doctor had only been afraid of gangrene .
That danger had also passed .
When they reached Yarosl'avl the wound had begun to fester ( Nat'asha knew all about such things as festering ) and the doctor had said that the festering might take a normal course .
Then fever set in , but the doctor had said the fever was not very serious .
" But two days ago this suddenly happened , " said Nat'asha , struggling with her sobs .
" I do n't know why , but you will see what he is like . "
" Is he weaker ?
Thinner ? " asked the princess .
" No , it 's not that , but worse .
You will see .
O , Mary , he is too good , he can not , can not live , because ... "
CHAPTER XV
When Nat'asha opened Prince Andrew 's door with a familiar movement and let Princess Mary pass into the room before her , the princess felt the sobs in her throat .
Hard as she had tried to prepare herself , and now tried to remain tranquil , she knew that she would be unable to look at him without tears .
The princess understood what Nat'asha had meant by the words : " two days ago this suddenly happened . "
She understood those words to mean that he had suddenly softened and that this softening and gentleness were signs of approaching death .
Yet sooner or later it had to be , and she went in .
The sobs rose higher and higher in her throat as she more and more clearly distinguished his form and her shortsighted eyes tried to make out his features , and then she saw his face and met his gaze .
He was lying in a squirrel - fur dressing gown on a divan , surrounded by pillows .
He was thin and pale .
In one thin , translucently white hand he held a handkerchief , while with the other he stroked the delicate mustache he had grown , moving his fingers slowly .
His eyes gazed at them as they entered .
On seeing his face and meeting his eyes Princess Mary 's pace suddenly slackened , she felt her tears dry up and her sobs ceased .
She suddenly felt guilty and grew timid on catching the expression of his face and eyes .
" But in what am I to blame ? " she asked herself .
And his cold , stern look replied : " Because you are alive and thinking of the living , while I ... "
In the deep gaze that seemed to look not outwards but inwards there was an almost hostile expression as he slowly regarded his sister and Nat'asha .
He kissed his sister , holding her hand in his as was their wo nt .
" How are you , Mary ?
How did you manage to get here ? "
said he in a voice as calm and aloof as his look .
Had he screamed in agony , that scream would not have struck such horror into Princess Mary 's heart as the tone of his voice .
" And have you brought little Nicholas ? "
he asked in the same slow , quiet manner and with an obvious effort to remember .
" How are you now ? " said Princess Mary , herself surprised at what she was saying .
" Merci , ch`ere amie , d'^etre venue . " *
* " Thank you for coming , my dear . "
Princess Mary pressed his hand .
The pressure made him wince just perceptibly .
He was silent , and she did not know what to say .
She now understood what had happened to him two days before .
In his words , his tone , and especially in that calm , almost antagonistic look could be felt an estrangement from everything belonging to this world , terrible in one who is alive .
" There , you see how strangely fate has brought us together , " said he , breaking the silence and pointing to Nat'asha .
" She looks after me all the time . "
Princess Mary heard him and did not understand how he could say such a thing .
He , the sensitive , tender Prince Andrew , how could he say that , before her whom he loved and who loved him ?
Had he expected to live
he could not have said those words in that offensively cold tone .
If he had not known that he was dying , how could he have failed to pity her and how could he speak like that in her presence ?
The only explanation was that he was indifferent , because something else , much more important , had been revealed to him .
The conversation was cold and disconnected and continually broke off .
" Mary came by way of Ryaz'an , " said Nat'asha .
Prince Andrew did not notice that she called his sister Mary , and only after calling her so in his presence did Nat'asha notice it herself .
" Really ? " he asked .
" They told her that all Moscow has been burned down , and that ... "
Nat'asha stopped .
It was impossible to talk .
It was plain that he was making an effort to listen , but could not do so .
" Yes , they say it 's burned , " he said .
" It 's a great pity , " and he gazed straight before him , absently stroking his mustache with his fingers .
" And so you have met Count Nicholas , Mary ? "
Prince Andrew suddenly said , evidently wishing to speak pleasantly to them . "
He wrote here that he took a great liking to you , " he went on simply and calmly , evidently unable to understand all the complex significance his words had for living people .
" If you liked him too , it would be a good thing for you to get married , " he added rather more quickly , as if pleased at having found words he had long been seeking .
Princess Mary heard his words but they had no meaning for her , except as a proof of how far away he now was from everything living .
" Why talk of me ? " she said quietly and glanced at Nat'asha .
Nat'asha , who felt her glance , did not look at her .
All three were again silent .
" Andrew , would you like ... " Princess Mary suddenly said in a trembling voice , " would you like to see little Nicholas ?
He is always talking about you ! "
" Yes , I shall be very glad to see him .
Is he quite well ? "
When little Nicholas was brought into Prince Andrew 's room he looked at his father with frightened eyes , but did not cry , because no one else was crying .
Prince Andrew kissed him and evidently did not know what to say to him .
When Nicholas had been led away , Princess Mary again went up to her brother , kissed him , and unable to restrain her tears any longer began to cry .
He looked at her attentively .
" Is it about Nicholas ? " he asked .
Princess Mary nodded her head , weeping .
" Mary , you know the Gosp ... " but he broke off .
" What did you say ? "
" Nothing .
You must n't cry here , " he said , looking at her with the same cold expression .
When Princess Mary began to cry , he understood that she was crying at the thought that little Nicholas would be left without a father .
With a great effort he tried to return to life and to see things from their point of view .
" Yes , to them it must seem sad ! " he thought . "
But how simple it is .
They ca n't understand that all those feelings they prize so - all our feelings , all those ideas that seem so important to us , are unnecessary .
We can not understand one another , " and he remained silent .
Prince Andrew 's little son was seven .
He could scarcely read , and knew nothing .
When Princess Mary had left Prince Andrew she fully understood what Nat'asha 's face had told her .
She did not speak any more to Nat'asha of hopes of saving his life .
She took turns with her beside his sofa , and did not cry any more , but prayed continually , turning in soul to that Eternal and Unfathomable , whose presence above the dying man was now so evident .
CHAPTER XVI
Not only did Prince Andrew know he would die , but he felt that he was dying and was already half dead .
He was conscious of an aloofness from everything earthly and a strange and joyous lightness of existence .
Without haste or agitation he awaited what was coming .
That inexorable , eternal , distant , and unknown the presence of which he had felt continually all his life - was now near to him and , by the strange lightness he experienced , almost comprehensible and palpable ....
Formerly he had feared the end .
He had twice experienced that terribly tormenting fear of death - the end - but now he no longer understood that fear .
To love everything and everybody and always to sacrifice oneself for love meant not to love anyone , not to live this earthly life .
When during those first days he remembered that he would have to die , he said to himself : "
Well , what of it ?
So much the better ! "
And joyful and agitating thoughts began to occupy his mind .
Recalling the moment at the ambulance station when he had seen Kur'agin , he could not now regain the feeling he then had , but was tormented by the question whether Kur'agin was alive .
And he dared not inquire .
His illness pursued its normal physical course , but what Nat'asha referred to when she said : " This suddenly happened , " had occurred two days before Princess Mary arrived .
It was the last spiritual struggle between life and death , in which death gained the victory .
It was evening .
As usual after dinner he was slightly feverish , and his thoughts were preternaturally clear .
S'onya was sitting by the table .
He began to doze .
Suddenly a feeling of happiness seized him .
" Ah , she has come ! " thought he .
And so it was : in S'onya 's place sat Nat'asha who had just come in noiselessly .
Since she had begun looking after him , he had always experienced this physical consciousness of her nearness .
She was sitting in an armchair placed sideways , screening the light of the candle from him , and was knitting a stocking .
She had learned to knit stockings since Prince Andrew had casually mentioned that no one nursed the sick so well as old nurses who knit stockings , and that there is something soothing in the knitting of stockings .
The needles clicked lightly in her slender , rapidly moving hands , and he could clearly see the thoughtful profile of her drooping face .
She moved , and the ball rolled off her knees .
She started , glanced round at him , and screening the candle with her hand stooped carefully with a supple and exact movement , picked up the ball , and regained her former position .
He looked at her without moving and saw that she wanted to draw a deep breath after stooping , but refrained from doing so and breathed cautiously .
" Can it or can it not be ? "
he now thought as he looked at her and listened to the light click of the steel needles . "
Can fate have brought me to her so strangely only for me to die ? ...
Is it possible that the truth of life has been revealed to me only to show me that I have spent my life in falsity ?
I love her more than anything in the world !
But what am I to do if I love her ? "
he thought , and he involuntarily groaned , from a habit acquired during his sufferings .
On hearing that sound Nat'asha put down the stocking , leaned nearer to him , and suddenly , noticing his shining eyes , stepped lightly up to him and bent over him .
" You are not asleep ? "
" No , I have been looking at you a long time .
I felt you come in .
No one else gives me that sense of soft tranquillity that you do ... that light .
I want to weep for joy . "
Nat'asha drew closer to him .
Her face shone with rapturous joy .
" Nat'asha , I love you too much !
More than anything in the world . "
" And I!"-She turned away for an instant . "
Why too much ?
" she asked .
" Why too much ? ...
Well , what do you , what do you feel in your soul , your whole soul - shall I live ?
What do you think ? "
" I am sure of it , sure ! " Nat'asha almost shouted , taking hold of both his hands with a passionate movement .
He remained silent awhile .
" How good it would be ! " and taking her hand he kissed it .
Nat'asha felt happy and agitated , but at once remembered that this would not do and that he had to be quiet .
" But you have not slept , " she said , repressing her joy . "
Try to sleep ... please ! "
He pressed her hand and released it , and she went back to the candle and sat down again in her former position .
Twice she turned and looked at him , and her eyes met his beaming at her .
She set herself a task on her stocking and resolved not to turn round till it was finished .
Soon he really shut his eyes and fell asleep .
He did not sleep long and suddenly awoke with a start and in a cold perspiration .
As he fell asleep he had still been thinking of the subject that now always occupied his mind - about life and death , and chiefly about death .
He felt himself nearer to it .
" Love ?
What is love ?
" he thought .
" Love hinders death .
Love is life .
All , everything that I understand , I understand only because I love .
Everything is , everything exists , only because I love .
Everything is united by it alone .
Love is God , and to die means that I , a particle of love , shall return to the general and eternal source . "
These thoughts seemed to him comforting .
But they were only thoughts .
Something was lacking in them , they were not clear , they were too one - sidedly personal and brain - spun .
And there was the former agitation and obscurity .
He fell asleep .
He dreamed that he was lying in the room he really was in , but that he was quite well and unwounded .
Many various , indifferent , and insignificant people appeared before him .
He talked to them and discussed something trivial .
They were preparing to go away somewhere .
Prince Andrew dimly realized that all this was trivial and that he had more important cares , but he continued to speak , surprising them by empty witticisms .
Gradually , unnoticed , all these persons began to disappear and a single question , that of the closed door , superseded all else .
He rose and went to the door to bolt and lock it .
Everything depended on whether he was , or was not , in time to lock it .
He went , and tried to hurry , but his legs refused to move and he knew he would not be in time to lock the door though he painfully strained all his powers .
He was seized by an agonizing fear .
And that fear was the fear of death .
It stood behind the door .
But just when he was clumsily creeping toward the door , that dreadful something on the other side was already pressing against it and forcing its way in .
Something not human - death - was breaking in through that door , and had to be kept out .
Once again it pushed from outside .
His last superhuman efforts were vain and both halves of the door noiselessly opened .
It entered , and it was death , and Prince Andrew died .
But at the instant he died , Prince Andrew remembered that he was asleep , and at the very instant he died , having made an effort , he awoke .
" Yes , it was death !
I died - and woke up .
Yes , death is an awakening ! "
And all at once it grew light in his soul and the veil that had till then concealed the unknown was lifted from his spiritual vision .
He felt as if powers till then confined within him had been liberated , and that strange lightness did not again leave him .
When , waking in a cold perspiration , he moved on the divan , Nat'asha went up and asked him what was the matter .
He did not answer and looked at her strangely , not understanding .
That was what had happened to him two days before Princess Mary 's arrival .
From that day an awakening from life came to Prince Andrew together with his awakening from sleep .
And compared to the duration of life it did not seem to him slower than an awakening from sleep compared to the duration of a dream .
There was nothing terrible or violent in this comparatively slow awakening .
His last days and hours passed in an ordinary and simple way .
Both Princess Mary and Nat'asha , who did not leave him , felt this .
They did not weep or shudder and during these last days
they themselves felt that they were not attending on him ( he was no longer there , he had left them ) but on what reminded them most closely of him - his body .
Both felt this so strongly that the outward and terrible side of death did not affect them and they did not feel it necessary to foment their grief .
Neither in his presence nor out of it did they weep , nor did they ever talk to one another about him .
They felt that they could not express in words what they understood .
They both saw that he was sinking slowly and quietly , deeper and deeper , away from them , and they both knew that this had to be so and that it was right .
He confessed , and received communion : everyone came to take leave of him .
When the last convulsions of the body , which the spirit was leaving , occurred , Princess Mary and Nat'asha were present .
" Is it over ? " said Princess Mary when his body had for a few minutes lain motionless , growing cold before them .
Nat'asha went up , looked at the dead eyes , and hastened to close them .
She closed them but did not kiss them , but clung to that which reminded her most nearly of him - his body .
" Where has he gone ?
Where is he now ? ... "
When the body , washed and dressed , lay in the coffin on a table , everyone came to take leave of him and they all wept .
Little Nicholas cried because his heart was rent by painful perplexity .
The countess and S'onya cried from pity for Nat'asha and because he was no more .
The old count cried because he felt that before long , he , too , must take the same terrible step .
