book thirteen : 1812
chapter i
man 's mind can not grasp the causes of events in their completeness , but the desire to find those causes is implanted in man 's soul .
there is , and can be , no cause of an historical event except the one cause of all causes .
but there are laws directing events , and some of these laws are known to us while we are conscious of others we can not comprehend .
they ascribe the glory of that achievement of genius to different men and dispute as to whom the honor is due .
even foreign historians , including the french , acknowledge the genius of the russian commanders when they speak of that flank march .
but it is hard to understand why military writers , and following them others , consider this flank march to be the profound conception of some one man who saved russia and destroyed napoleon .
so it is impossible to understand by what reasoning the historians reach the conclusion that this maneuver was a profound one .
if the position of the russian army really began to improve from the time of that march , it does not at all follow that the march was the cause of it .
that flank march might not only have failed to give any advantage to the russian army , but might in other circumstances have led to its destruction .
what would have happened had moscow not burned down ?
if murat had not lost sight of the russians ?
if napoleon had not remained inactive ?
if the russian army at kr'asnaya pakhr'a had given battle as bennigsen and barclay advised ?
what would have happened had the french attacked the russians while they were marching beyond the pakhr'a ?
what would have happened if on approaching tar'utino , napoleon had attacked the russians with but a tenth of the energy he had shown when he attacked them at smol'ensk ?
what would have happened had the french moved on petersburg ? ...
in any of these eventualities the flank march that brought salvation might have proved disastrous .
at the council at fil'i the prevailing thought in the minds of the russian commanders was the one naturally suggesting itself , namely , a direct retreat by the n'izhni road .
this was the first indication of the necessity of deviating from what had previously seemed the most natural course - a direct retreat on n'izhni - n'ovgorod .
the army turned more to the south , along the ryaz'an road and nearer to its supplies .
just as it is impossible to say when it was decided to abandon moscow , so it is impossible to say precisely when , or by whom , it was decided to move to tar'utino .
only when the army had got there , as the result of innumerable and varying forces , did people begin to assure themselves that they had desired this movement and long ago foreseen its result .
chapter ii
at tar'utino kut'uzov received what was almost a reprimand from the emperor for having moved his army along the ryaz'an road , and the emperor 's letter indicated to him the very position he had already occupied near kal'uga .
kut'uzov 's merit lay , not in any strategic maneuver of genius , as it is called , but in the fact that he alone understood the significance of what had happened .
the beast wounded at borodin'o was lying where the fleeing hunter had left him ; but whether he was still alive , whether he was strong and merely lying low , the hunter did not know .
suddenly the beast was heard to moan .
the moan of that wounded beast ( the french army ) which betrayed its calamitous condition was the sending of lauriston to kut'uzov 's camp with overtures for peace .
napoleon , with his usual assurance that whatever entered his head was right , wrote to kut'uzov the first words that occurred to him , though they were meaningless .
monsieur le prince koutouzov :
i am sending one of my adjutants - general to discuss several interesting questions with you .
i beg your highness to credit what he says to you , especially when he expresses the sentiment of esteem and special regard i have long entertained for your person .
this letter having no other object , i pray god , monsieur le prince koutouzov , to keep you in his holy and gracious protection !
napoleon
moscow , october 30 , 1812
kut'uzov replied : " i should be cursed by posterity were i looked on as the initiator of a settlement of any sort .
such is the present spirit of my nation . "
but he continued to exert all his powers to restrain his troops from attacking .
though the condition and numbers of the french army were unknown to the russians , as soon as that change occurred the need of attacking at once showed itself by countless signs .
there was a substantial change in the relative strength , and an advance had become inevitable .
chapter iii
the russian army was commanded by kut'uzov and his staff , and also by the emperor from petersburg .
before the news of the abandonment of moscow had been received in petersburg , a detailed plan of the whole campaign had been drawn up and sent to kut'uzov for his guidance .
though this plan had been drawn up on the supposition that moscow was still in our hands , it was approved by the staff and accepted as a basis for action .
kut'uzov only replied that movements arranged from a distance were always difficult to execute .
so fresh instructions were sent for the solution of difficulties that might be encountered , as well as fresh people who were to watch kut'uzov 's actions and report upon them .
besides this , the whole staff of the russian army was now reorganized .
the posts left vacant by bagrati'on , who had been killed , and by barclay , who had gone away in dudgeon , had to be filled .
a was undermining b , d was undermining c , and so on in all possible combinations and permutations .
only in the highest spheres did all these schemes , crossings , and interminglings appear to be a true reflection of what had to happen .
prince michael ilari'onovich !
( wrote the emperor on the second of october in a letter that reached kut'uzov after the battle at tar'utino )
since september 2 moscow has been in the hands of the enemy .
s'erpukhov is already occupied by an enemy detachment and t'ula with its famous arsenal so indispensable to the army , is in danger .
from general wintzingerode 's reports , i see that an enemy corps of ten thousand men is moving on the petersburg road .
another corps of several thousand men is moving on dm'itrov .
a third has advanced along the vlad'imir road , and a fourth , rather considerable detachment is stationed between r'uza and mozh'aysk .
napoleon himself was in moscow as late as the twenty - fifth .
on the contrary , he is probably pursuing you with detachments , or at most with an army corps much weaker than the army entrusted to you .
remember that you have still to answer to our offended country for the loss of moscow .
you have experienced my readiness to reward you .
on the second of october a cossack , shapov'alov , who was out scouting , killed one hare and wounded another .
following the wounded hare he made his way far into the forest and came upon the left flank of murat 's army , encamped there without any precautions .
the cossack laughingly told his comrades how he had almost fallen into the hands of the french .
a cornet , hearing the story , informed his commander .
the cossack was sent for and questioned .
the cossack officers wished to take advantage of this chance to capture some horses , but one of the superior officers , who was acquainted with the higher authorities , reported the incident to a general on the staff .
the state of things on the staff had of late been exceedingly strained .
erm'olov had been to see bennigsen a few days previously and had entreated him to use his influence with the commander in chief to induce him to take the offensive .
" if i did not know you i should think you did not want what you are asking for .
i need only advise anything and his highness is sure to do the opposite , " replied bennigsen .
the cossack 's report , confirmed by horse patrols who were sent out , was the final proof that events had matured .
the tightly coiled spring was released , the clock began to whirr and the chimes to play .
chapter iv
bennigsen 's note and the cossack 's information that the left flank of the french was unguarded were merely final indications that it was necessary to order an attack , and it was fixed for the fifth of october .
on the morning of the fourth of october kut'uzov signed the dispositions .
toll read them to erm'olov , asking him to attend to the further arrangements .
" all right - all right .
i have n't time just now , " replied erm'olov , and left the hut .
the dispositions drawn up by toll were very good .
as in the austerlitz dispositions , it was written - though not in german this time :
everything had been admirably thought out as is usual in dispositions , and as is always the case , not a single column reached its place at the appointed time .
when the necessary number of copies of the dispositions had been prepared , an officer was summoned and sent to deliver them to erm'olov to deal with .
a young officer of the horse guards , kut'uzov 's orderly , pleased at the importance of the mission entrusted to him , went to erm'olov 's quarters .
" gone away , " said erm'olov 's orderly .
the officer of the horse guards went to a general with whom erm'olov was often to be found .
" no , and the general 's out too . "
the officer , mounting his horse , rode off to someone else .
" no , he 's gone out . "
" if only they do n't make me responsible for this delay !
what a nuisance it is ! "
thought the officer , and he rode round the whole camp .
one man said he had seen erm'olov ride past with some other generals , others said he must have returned home .
the officer searched till six o'clock in the evening without even stopping to eat .
erm'olov was nowhere to be found and no one knew where he was .
the officer snatched a little food at a comrade 's , and rode again to the vanguard to find milor'adovich .
milor'adovich too was away , but here he was told that he had gone to a ball at general k'ikin 's and that erm'olov was probably there too .
" but where is it ? "
" why , there , over at ' echkino , " said a cossack officer , pointing to a country house in the far distance .
" what , outside our line ? "
" they 've put two regiments as outposts , and they 're having such a spree there , it 's awful !
two bands and three sets of singers ! "
the officer rode out beyond our lines to ' echkino .
while still at a distance he heard as he rode the merry sounds of a soldier 's dance song proceeding from the house .
" in the meadows ... in the meadows ! " he heard , accompanied by whistling and the sound of a torban , drowned every now and then by shouts .
these sounds made his spirits rise , but at the same time he was afraid that he would be blamed for not having executed sooner the important order entrusted to him .
it was already past eight o'clock .
he dismounted and went up into the porch of a large country house which had remained intact between the russian and french forces .
in the refreshment room and the hall , footmen were bustling about with wine and viands .
groups of singers stood outside the windows .
the officer was admitted and immediately saw all the chief generals of the army together , and among them erm'olov 's big imposing figure .
they all had their coats unbuttoned and were standing in a semicircle with flushed and animated faces , laughing loudly .
in the middle of the room a short handsome general with a red face was dancing the trep'ak with much spirit and agility .
" ha , ha , ha !
bravo , nicholas iv'anych !
ha , ha , ha ! "
erm'olov came forward with a frown on his face and , hearing what the officer had to say , took the papers from him without a word .
" you think he went off just by chance ? " said a comrade , who was on the staff that evening , to the officer of the horse guards , referring to erm'olov .
" it was a trick .
it was done on purpose to get konovn'itsyn into trouble .
you 'll see what a mess there 'll be tomorrow . "
chapter v
he sat in the cal`eche , dozing and waking up by turns , and listening for any sound of firing on the right as an indication that the action had begun .
but all was still quiet .
a damp dull autumn morning was just dawning .
on approaching tar'utino kut'uzov noticed cavalrymen leading their horses to water across the road along which he was driving .
kut'uzov looked at them searchingly , stopped his carriage , and inquired what regiment they belonged to .
they belonged to a column that should have been far in front and in ambush long before then .
" it may be a mistake , " thought the old commander in chief .
but a little further on he saw infantry regiments with their arms piled and the soldiers , only partly dressed , eating their rye porridge and carrying fuel .
he sent for an officer .
the officer reported that no order to advance had been received .
" how ! not rec ... " kut'uzov began , but checked himself immediately and sent for a senior officer .
getting out of his cal`eche , he waited with drooping head and breathing heavily , pacing silently up and down .
another man , captain br'ozin , who happened to turn up and who was not at all to blame , suffered the same fate .
" what sort of another blackguard are you ?
i 'll have you shot !
scoundrels ! "
yelled kut'uzov in a hoarse voice , waving his arms and reeling .
he was suffering physically .
he , the commander in chief , a serene highness who everybody said possessed powers such as no man had ever had in russia , to be placed in this position - made the laughingstock of the whole army !
" i need n't have been in such a hurry to pray about today , or have kept awake thinking everything over all night , " thought he to himself .
" when i was a chit of an officer no one would have dared to mock me so ... and now ! "
he was in a state of physical suffering as if from corporal punishment , and could not avoid expressing it by cries of anger and distress .
but his strength soon began to fail him , and looking about him , conscious of having said much that was amiss , he again got into his cal`eche and drove back in silence .
and once more kut'uzov had to consent .
chapter vi
next day the troops assembled in their appointed places in the evening and advanced during the night .
it was an autumn night with dark purple clouds , but no rain .
the ground was damp but not muddy , and the troops advanced noiselessly , only occasionally a jingling of the artillery could be faintly heard .
the men were forbidden to talk out loud , to smoke their pipes , or to strike a light , and they tried to prevent their horses neighing .
the secrecy of the undertaking heightened its charm and they marched gaily .
only count orl'ov - den'isov with his cossacks ( the least important detachment of all ) got to his appointed place at the right time .
this detachment halted at the outskirts of a forest , on the path leading from the village of strom'ilova to dm'itrovsk .
toward dawn , count orl'ov - den'isov , who had dozed off , was awakened by a deserter from the french army being brought to him .
he said that murat was spending the night less than a mile from where they were , and that if they would let him have a convoy of a hundred men he would capture him alive .
count orl'ov - den'isov consulted his fellow officers .
the offer was too tempting to be refused .
everyone volunteered to go and everybody advised making the attempt .
after much disputing and arguing , major - general gr'ekov with two cossack regiments decided to go with the polish sergeant .
without replying , the sergeant , with a resolute air , mounted and rode away with gr'ekov whose men had quickly assembled .
our columns ought to have begun to appear on an open declivity to his right .
he looked in that direction , but though the columns would have been visible quite far off , they were not to be seen .
it seemed to the count that things were beginning to stir in the french camp , and his keen - sighted adjutant confirmed this .
" oh , it is really too late , " said count orl'ov , looking at the camp .
how could one capture a commander in chief from among such a mass of troops !
" i am sure that rascal was lying , " said the count .
" they can still be called back , " said one of his suite , who like count orl'ov felt distrustful of the adventure when he looked at the enemy 's camp .
" eh ?
really ... what do you think ?
should we let them go on or not ? "
" will you have them fetched back ? "
" fetch them back , fetch them back ! " said count orl'ov with sudden determination , looking at his watch .
" it will be too late .
it is quite light . "
and the adjutant galloped through the forest after gr'ekov .
all his men felt the same excitement .
" mount ! " he commanded in a whisper .
the men took their places and crossed themselves .... "
forward , with god 's aid ! "
" hurrah - ah - ah ! "
reverberated in the forest , and the cossack companies , trailing their lances and advancing one after another as if poured out of a sack , dashed gaily across the brook toward the camp .
had the cossacks pursued the french , without heeding what was behind and around them , they would have captured murat and everything there .
that was what the officers desired .
but it was impossible to make the cossacks budge when once they had got booty and prisoners .
none of them listened to orders .
fifteen hundred prisoners and thirty - eight guns were taken on the spot , besides standards and ( what seemed most important to the cossacks ) horses , saddles , horsecloths , and the like .
the french , not being farther pursued , began to recover themselves : they formed into detachments and began firing .
orl'ov - den'isov , still waiting for the other columns to arrive , advanced no further .
as always happens the men , starting cheerfully , began to halt ; murmurs were heard , there was a sense of confusion , and finally a backward movement .
" we shall get somewhere or other ! "
toll , who in this battle played the part of weyrother at austerlitz , galloped assiduously from place to place , finding everything upside down everywhere .
thus he stumbled on bagov'ut 's corps in a wood when it was already broad daylight , though the corps should long before have joined orl'ov - den'isov .
excited and vexed by the failure and supposing that someone must be responsible for it , toll galloped up to the commander of the corps and began upbraiding him severely , saying that he ought to be shot .
" i prefer not to take lessons from anyone , but i can die with my men as well as anybody , " he said , and advanced with a single division .
danger , cannon balls , and bullets were just what he needed in his angry mood .
one of the first bullets killed him , and other bullets killed many of his men .
and his division remained under fire for some time quite uselessly .
chapter vii
meanwhile another column was to have attacked the french from the front , but kut'uzov accompanied that column .
he well knew that nothing but confusion would come of this battle undertaken against his will , and as far as was in his power held the troops back .
he did not advance .
he rode silently on his small gray horse , indolently answering suggestions that they should attack .
" the word attack is always on your tongue , but you do n't see that we are unable to execute complicated maneuvers , " said he to milor'adovich who asked permission to advance .
" we could n't take murat prisoner this morning or get to the place in time , and nothing can be done now ! "
he replied to someone else .
" you see !
they are asking to attack and making plans of all kinds , but as soon as one gets to business nothing is ready , and the enemy , forewarned , takes measures accordingly . "
erm'olov screwed up his eyes and smiled faintly on hearing these words .
he understood that for him the storm had blown over , and that kut'uzov would content himself with that hint .
" he 's having a little fun at my expense , " said erm'olov softly , nudging with his knee ra'evski who was at his side .
soon after this , erm'olov moved up to kut'uzov and respectfully remarked :
" it is not too late yet , your highness - the enemy has not gone away - if you were to order an attack !
if not , the guards will not so much as see a little smoke . "
kut'uzov did not reply , but when they reported to him that murat 's troops were in retreat he ordered an advance , though at every hundred paces he halted for three quarters of an hour .
the whole battle consisted in what orl'ov - den'isov 's cossacks had done : the rest of the army merely lost some hundreds of men uselessly .
but people who talk like that either do not know what they are talking about or deliberately deceive themselves .
no battle - tar'utino , borodin'o , or austerlitz - takes place as those who planned it anticipated .
that is an essential condition .
if in the descriptions given by historians , especially french ones , we find their wars and battles carried out in accordance with previously formed plans , the only conclusion to be drawn is that those descriptions are false .
it would be difficult and even impossible to imagine any result more opportune than the actual outcome of this battle .
chapter viii
napoleon enters moscow after the brilliant victory de la moskowa ; there can be no doubt about the victory for the battlefield remains in the hands of the french .
the russians retreat and abandon their ancient capital .
moscow , abounding in provisions , arms , munitions , and incalculable wealth , is in napoleon 's hands .
the russian army , only half the strength of the french , does not make a single attempt to attack for a whole month .
napoleon 's position is most brilliant .
yet napoleon , that greatest of all geniuses , who the historians declare had control of the army , took none of these steps .
he not merely did nothing of the kind , but on the contrary he used his power to select the most foolish and ruinous of all the courses open to him .
nothing more stupid than that could have been devised , or more disastrous for the army , as the sequel showed .
had napoleon 's aim been to destroy his army , the most skillful strategist could hardly have devised any series of actions that would so completely have accomplished that purpose , independently of anything the russian army might do .
napoleon , the man of genius , did this !
in both cases his personal activity , having no more force than the personal activity of any soldier , merely coincided with the laws that guided the event .
the historians quite falsely represent napoleon 's faculties as having weakened in moscow , and do so only because the results did not justify his actions .
he employed all his ability and strength to do the best he could for himself and his army , as he had done previously and as he did subsequently in 1813 .
his activity at that time was no less astounding than it was in egypt , in italy , in austria , and in prussia .
we do not know for certain in how far his genius was genuine in egypt - where forty centuries looked down upon his grandeur - for his great exploits there are all told us by frenchmen .
but we , thank god , have no need to recognize his genius in order to hide our shame .
we have paid for the right to look at the matter plainly and simply , and we will not abandon that right .
his activity in moscow was as amazing and as full of genius as elsewhere .
order after order and plan after plan were issued by him from the time he entered moscow till the time he left it .
the absence of citizens and of a deputation , and even the burning of moscow , did not disconcert him .
chapter ix
then he gave careful directions about the fortification of the kr'emlin , and drew up a brilliant plan for a future campaign over the whole map of russia .
having similarly explained his views and his magnanimity to tut'olmin , he dispatched that old man also to petersburg to negotiate .
with regard to legal matters , immediately after the fires he gave orders to find and execute the incendiaries .
and the scoundrel rostopch'in was punished by an order to burn down his houses .
with regard to administrative matters , moscow was granted a constitution .
a municipality was established and the following announcement issued :
inhabitants of moscow !
your misfortunes are cruel , but his majesty the emperor and king desires to arrest their course .
terrible examples have taught you how he punishes disobedience and crime .
strict measures have been taken to put an end to disorder and to re - establish public security .
a paternal administration , chosen from among yourselves , will form your municipality or city government .
it will take care of you , of your needs , and of your welfare .
its members will be distinguished by a red ribbon worn across the shoulder , and the mayor of the city will wear a white belt as well .
but when not on duty they will only wear a red ribbon round the left arm .
the city police is established on its former footing , and better order already prevails in consequence of its activity .
the government has appointed two commissaries general , or chiefs of police , and twenty commissaries or captains of wards have been appointed to the different wards of the city .
you will recognize them by the white ribbon they will wear on the left arm .
several churches of different denominations are open , and divine service is performed in them unhindered .
your fellow citizens are returning every day to their homes and orders have been given that they should find in them the help and protection due to their misfortunes .
these are the measures the government has adopted to re - establish order and relieve your condition .
* as looters .
with regard to religion , napoleon ordered the priests to be brought back and services to be again performed in the churches .
with regard to commerce and to provisioning the army , the following was placarded everywhere :
proclamation
you , peaceful inhabitants of moscow , artisans and workmen whom misfortune has driven from the city , and you scattered tillers of the soil , still kept out in the fields by groundless fear , listen !
tranquillity is returning to this capital and order is being restored in it .
your fellow countrymen are emerging boldly from their hiding places on finding that they are respected .
any violence to them or to their property is promptly punished .
his majesty the emperor and king protects them , and considers no one among you his enemy except those who disobey his orders .
he desires to end your misfortunes and restore you to your homes and families .
respond , therefore , to his benevolent intentions and come to us without fear .
inhabitants , return with confidence to your abodes !
you will soon find means of satisfying your needs .
craftsmen and industrious artisans , return to your work , your houses , your shops , where the protection of guards awaits you !
you shall receive proper pay for your work .
and lastly you too , peasants , come from the forests where you are hiding in terror , return to your huts without fear , in full assurance that you will find protection !
markets are established in the city where peasants can bring their surplus supplies and the products of the soil .
( 4 ) similar measures will be taken that peasants with their carts and horses may meet with no hindrance on their return journey .
( 5 ) steps will immediately be taken to re - establish ordinary trading .
lay your respect and confidence at his feet and do not delay to unite with us !
with the object of raising the spirits of the troops and of the people , reviews were constantly held and rewards distributed .
the emperor rode through the streets to comfort the inhabitants , and , despite his preoccupation with state affairs , himself visited the theaters that were established by his order .
in regard to philanthropy , the greatest virtue of crowned heads , napoleon also did all in his power .
he caused the words maison de ma m`ere to be inscribed on the charitable institutions , thereby combining tender filial affection with the majestic benevolence of a monarch .
he visited the foundling hospital and , allowing the orphans saved by him to kiss his white hands , graciously conversed with tut'olmin .
with reference to army discipline , orders were continually being issued to inflict severe punishment for the nonperformance of military duties and to suppress robbery .
chapter x
the fortifying of the kr'emlin , for which la mosqu'ee ( as napoleon termed the church of basil the beatified ) was to have been razed to the ground , proved quite useless .
the mining of the kr'emlin only helped toward fulfilling napoleon 's wish that it should be blown up when he left moscow - as a child wants the floor on which he has hurt himself to be beaten .
the pursuit of the russian army , about which napoleon was so concerned , produced an unheard - of result .
with regard to legal matters , after the execution of the supposed incendiaries the rest of moscow burned down .
with regard to religion , as to which in egypt matters had so easily been settled by napoleon 's visit to a mosque , no results were achieved .
that night the doors were again broken open , the padlocks smashed , the books mutilated , and other disorders perpetrated . "
with reference to commerce , the proclamation to industrious workmen and to peasants evoked no response .
there were no industrious workmen , and the peasants caught the commissaries who ventured too far out of town with the proclamation and killed them .
as to the theaters for the entertainment of the people and the troops , these did not meet with success either .
the theaters set up in the kr'emlin and in posny'akov 's house were closed again at once because the actors and actresses were robbed .
even philanthropy did not have the desired effect .
the genuine as well as the false paper money which flooded moscow lost its value .
the french , collecting booty , cared only for gold .
not only was the paper money valueless which napoleon so graciously distributed to the unfortunate , but even silver lost its value in relation to gold .
but the most amazing example of the ineffectiveness of the orders given by the authorities at that time was napoleon 's attempt to stop the looting and re - establish discipline .
this is what the army authorities were reporting :
" looting continues in the city despite the decrees against it .
order is not yet restored and not a single merchant is carrying on trade in a lawful manner .
the sutlers alone venture to trade , and they sell stolen goods . "
" nothing new , except that the soldiers are robbing and pillaging - october 9 . "
" robbery and pillaging continue .
there is a band of thieves in our district who ought to be arrested by a strong force - october 11 . "
" the emperor is extremely displeased that despite the strict orders to stop pillage , parties of marauding guards are continually seen returning to the kr'emlin .
among the old guard disorder and pillage were renewed more violently than ever yesterday evening , last night , and today .
others have disgraced themselves to the extent of disobeying sentinels and officers , and have abused and beaten them . "
that army , like a herd of cattle run wild and trampling underfoot the provender which might have saved it from starvation , disintegrated and perished with each additional day it remained in moscow .
but it did not go away .
it began to run away only when suddenly seized by a panic caused by the capture of transport trains on the smol'ensk road , and by the battle of tar'utino .
fleeing from moscow the soldiers took with them everything they had stolen .
napoleon , too , carried away his own personal tr'esor , but on seeing the baggage trains that impeded the army , he was ( thiers says ) horror - struck .
and yet with his experience of war he did not order all the superfluous vehicles to be burned , as he had done with those of a certain marshal when approaching moscow .
he gazed at the cal`eches and carriages in which soldiers were riding and remarked that it was a very good thing , as those vehicles could be used to carry provisions , the sick , and the wounded .
the plight of the whole army resembled that of a wounded animal which feels it is perishing and does not know what it is doing .
to study the skillful tactics and aims of napoleon and his army from the time it entered moscow till it was destroyed is like studying the dying leaps and shudders of a mortally wounded animal .
very often a wounded animal , hearing a rustle , rushes straight at the hunter 's gun , runs forward and back again , and hastens its own end .
napoleon , under pressure from his whole army , did the same thing .
chapter xi
this little dog lived in their shed , sleeping beside karat'aev at night ; it sometimes made excursions into the town but always returned again .
probably it had never had an owner , and it still belonged to nobody and had no name .
the french called it azor ; the soldier who told stories called it femg'alka ; karat'aev and others called it gray , or sometimes flabby .
its lack of a master , a name , or even of a breed or any definite color did not seem to trouble the blue - gray dog in the least .
everything pleased it .
now it would roll on its back , yelping with delight , now bask in the sun with a thoughtful air of importance , and now frolic about playing with a chip of wood or a straw .
physically he had changed much during this time .
he no longer seemed stout , though he still had the appearance of solidity and strength hereditary in his family .
a beard and mustache covered the lower part of his face , and a tangle of hair , infested with lice , curled round his head like a cap .
the look of his eyes was resolute , calm , and animatedly alert , as never before .
the former slackness which had shown itself even in his eyes was now replaced by an energetic readiness for action and resistance .
his feet were bare .
every time he looked at his bare feet a smile of animated self - satisfaction flitted across his face .
the sight of them reminded him of all he had experienced and learned during these weeks and this recollection was pleasant to him .
for some days the weather had been calm and clear with slight frosts in the mornings - what is called an " old wives ' summer . "
in the sunshine the air was warm , and that warmth was particularly pleasant with the invigorating freshness of the morning frost still in the air .
on everything - far and near - lay the magic crystal glitter seen only at that time of autumn .
the sparrow hills were visible in the distance , with the village , the church , and the large white house .
near by could be seen the familiar ruins of a half - burned mansion occupied by the french , with lilac bushes still showing dark green beside the fence .
and even that ruined and befouled house - which in dull weather was repulsively ugly - seemed quietly beautiful now , in the clear , motionless brilliance .
" what sunshine , monsieur kiril ! "
( their name for pierre . )
" eh ? just like spring ! "
and the corporal leaned against the door and offered pierre his pipe , though whenever he offered it pierre always declined it .
" to be on the march in such weather ... " he began .
pierre inquired what was being said about leaving , and the corporal told him that nearly all the troops were starting and there ought to be an order about the prisoners that day .
sokol'ov , one of the soldiers in the shed with pierre , was dying , and pierre told the corporal that something should be done about him .
" besides , monsieur kiril , you have only to say a word to the captain , you know .
he is a man who never forgets anything .
speak to the captain when he makes his round , he will do anything for you . "
( the captain of whom the corporal spoke often had long chats with pierre and showed him all sorts of favors . )
" ' you see , st. thomas , ' he said to me the other day . '
monsieur kiril is a man of education , who speaks french .
he is a russian seigneur who has had misfortunes , but he is a man .
he knows what 's what ....
if he wants anything and asks me , he wo n't get a refusal .
when one has studied , you see , one likes education and well - bred people . '
it is for your sake i mention it , monsieur kiril .
the other day if it had not been for you that affair would have ended ill . "
and after chatting a while longer , the corporal went away .
( the affair he had alluded to had happened a few days before - a fight between the prisoners and the french soldiers , in which pierre had succeeded in pacifying his comrades . )
some of the prisoners who had heard pierre talking to the corporal immediately asked what the frenchman had said .
while pierre was repeating what he had been told about the army leaving moscow , a thin , sallow , tattered french soldier came up to the door of the shed .
rapidly and timidly raising his fingers to his forehead by way of greeting , he asked pierre whether the soldier platoche to whom he had given a shirt to sew was in that shed .
a week before the french had had boot leather and linen issued to them , which they had given out to the prisoners to make up into boots and shirts for them .
" ready , ready , dear fellow ! "
said karat'aev , coming out with a neatly folded shirt .
karat'aev , on account of the warm weather and for convenience at work , was wearing only trousers and a tattered shirt as black as soot .
his hair was bound round , workman fashion , with a wisp of lime - tree bast , and his round face seemed rounder and pleasanter than ever .
" a promise is own brother to performance !
i said friday and here it is , ready , " said plat'on , smiling and unfolding the shirt he had sewn .
the frenchman glanced around uneasily and then , as if overcoming his hesitation , rapidly threw off his uniform and put on the shirt .
he had a long , greasy , flowered silk waistcoat next to his sallow , thin bare body , but no shirt .
he was evidently afraid the prisoners looking on would laugh at him , and thrust his head into the shirt hurriedly .
none of the prisoners said a word .
" see , it fits well ! "
plat'on kept repeating , pulling the shirt straight .
the frenchman , having pushed his head and hands through , without raising his eyes , looked down at the shirt and examined the seams .
" it 's good , quite good , thank you , " said the frenchman , in french , " but there must be some linen left over . "
" it will fit better still when it sets to your body , " said karat'aev , still admiring his handiwork .
" you 'll be nice and comfortable .... "
" thanks , thanks , old fellow ....
but the bits left over ? " said the frenchman again and smiled .
he took out an assignation ruble note and gave it to karat'aev . "
but give me the pieces that are over . "
pierre saw that plat'on did not want to understand what the frenchman was saying , and he looked on without interfering .
karat'aev thanked the frenchman for the money and went on admiring his own work .
the frenchman insisted on having the pieces returned that were left over and asked pierre to translate what he said .
" what does he want the bits for ? " said karat'aev .
" they 'd make fine leg bands for us .
well , never mind . "
and karat'aev , with a suddenly changed and saddened expression , took a small bundle of scraps from inside his shirt and gave it to the frenchman without looking at him . "
oh dear ! "
muttered karat'aev and went away .
the frenchman looked at the linen , considered for a moment , then looked inquiringly at pierre and , as if pierre 's look had told him something , suddenly blushed and shouted in a squeaky voice :
" platoche !
eh , platoche !
keep them yourself ! "
and handing back the odd bits he turned and went out .
" there , look at that , " said karat'aev , swaying his head .
" people said they were not christians , but they too have souls .
it 's what the old folk used to say : ' a sweating hand 's an open hand , a dry hand 's close . '
he 's naked , but yet he 's given it back . "
karat'aev smiled thoughtfully and was silent awhile looking at the pieces .
" but they 'll make grand leg bands , dear friend , " he said , and went back into the shed .
chapter xii
and just at this time he obtained the tranquillity and ease of mind he had formerly striven in vain to reach .
he had long sought in different ways that tranquillity of mind , that inner harmony which had so impressed him in the soldiers at the battle of borodin'o .
and now without thinking about it he had found that peace and inner harmony only through the horror of death , through privation , and through what he recognized in karat'aev .
those dreadful moments he had lived through at the executions had as it were forever washed away from his imagination and memory the agitating thoughts and feelings that had formerly seemed so important .
it did not now occur to him to think of russia , or the war , or politics , or napoleon .
it was plain to him that all these things were no business of his , and that he was not called on to judge concerning them and therefore could not do so . "
russia and summer weather are not bound together , " he thought , repeating words of karat'aev 's which he found strangely consoling .
his intention of killing napoleon and his calculations of the cabalistic number of the beast of the apocalypse now seemed to him meaningless and even ridiculous .
his anger with his wife and anxiety that his name should not be smirched now seemed not merely trivial but even amusing .
what concern was it of his that somewhere or other that woman was leading the life she preferred ?
what did it matter to anybody , and especially to him , whether or not they found out that their prisoner 's name was count bez'ukhov ?
he now often remembered his conversation with prince andrew and quite agreed with him , though he understood prince andrew 's thoughts somewhat differently .
but pierre believed it without any mental reservation .
all pierre 's daydreams now turned on the time when he would be free .
and this not only stayed with him during the whole of his imprisonment , but even grew in strength as the hardships of his position increased .
that feeling of alertness and of readiness for anything was still further strengthened in him by the high opinion his fellow prisoners formed of him soon after his arrival at the shed .
the very qualities that had been a hindrance , if not actually harmful , to him in the world he had lived in - his strength , his disdain for the comforts of life ,
his absent - mindedness and simplicity - here among these people gave him almost the status of a hero .
and pierre felt that their opinion placed responsibilities upon him .
chapter xiii
the french evacuation began on the night between the sixth and seventh of october : kitchens and sheds were dismantled , carts loaded , and troops and baggage trains started .
in the shed everyone was ready , dressed , belted , shod , and only awaited the order to start .
the sick soldier , sokol'ov , pale and thin with dark shadows round his eyes , alone sat in his place barefoot and not dressed .
his eyes , prominent from the emaciation of his face , gazed inquiringly at his comrades who were paying no attention to him , and he moaned regularly and quietly .
it was evidently not so much his sufferings that caused him to moan ( he had dysentery ) as his fear and grief at being left alone .
" you know , sokol'ov , they are not all going away !
they have a hospital here .
you may be better off than we others , " said pierre .
" o lord !
oh , it will be the death of me !
o lord ! " moaned the man in a louder voice .
" i 'll go and ask them again directly , " said pierre , rising and going to the door of the shed .
just as pierre reached the door , the corporal who had offered him a pipe the day before came up to it with two soldiers .
the corporal and soldiers were in marching kit with knapsacks and shakos that had metal straps , and these changed their familiar faces .
the corporal came , according to orders , to shut the door .
the prisoners had to be counted before being let out .
" corporal , what will they do with the sick man ? ... " pierre began .
but even as he spoke he began to doubt whether this was the corporal he knew or a stranger , so unlike himself did the corporal seem at that moment .
moreover , just as pierre was speaking a sharp rattle of drums was suddenly heard from both sides .
the corporal frowned at pierre 's words and , uttering some meaningless oaths , slammed the door .
the shed became semidark , and the sharp rattle of the drums on two sides drowned the sick man 's groans .
" there it is ! ...
it again ! ... " said pierre to himself , and an involuntary shudder ran down his spine .
to fear or to try to escape that force , to address entreaties or exhortations to those who served as its tools , was useless .
pierre knew this now .
one had to wait and endure .
he did not again go to the sick man , nor turn to look at him , but stood frowning by the door of the hut .
the captain was also in marching kit , and on his cold face appeared that same it which pierre had recognized in the corporal 's words and in the roll of the drums .
" pass on , pass on ! "
the captain reiterated , frowning sternly , and looking at the prisoners who thronged past him .
pierre went up to him , though he knew his attempt would be vain .
" what now ? "
the officer asked with a cold look as if not recognizing pierre .
pierre told him about the sick man .
" he 'll manage to walk , devil take him ! " said the captain . "
pass on , pass on ! "
he continued without looking at pierre .
" but he is dying , " pierre again began .
" be so good ... " shouted the captain , frowning angrily .
" dram - da - da - dam , dam - dam ... " rattled the drums , and pierre understood that this mysterious force completely controlled these men and that it was now useless to say any more .
the officer prisoners were separated from the soldiers and told to march in front .
there were about thirty officers , with pierre among them , and about three hundred men .
the officers , who had come from the other sheds , were all strangers to pierre and much better dressed than he .
they looked at him and at his shoes mistrustfully , as at an alien .
he kept one hand , in which he clasped his tobacco pouch , inside the bosom of his dressing gown and held the stem of his pipe firmly with the other .
another , a thin little officer , was speaking to everyone , conjecturing where they were now being taken and how far they would get that day .
a third officer , who by his accent was a pole , disputed with the commissariat officer , arguing that he was mistaken in his identification of the different wards of moscow .
" what are you disputing about ? " said the major angrily .
" what does it matter whether it is st. nicholas or st. blasius ?
you see it 's burned down , and there 's an end of it ....
what are you pushing for ?
is n't the road wide enough ? " said he , turning to a man behind him who was not pushing him at all .
" oh , oh , oh !
what have they done ?
" the prisoners on one side and another were heard saying as they gazed on the charred ruins .
" all beyond the river , and z'ubova , and in the kr'emlin .... just look !
there 's not half of it left .
yes , i told you - the whole quarter beyond the river , and so it is . "
" well , you know it 's burned , so what 's the use of talking ? " said the major .
as they passed near a church in the kham'ovniki ( one of the few unburned quarters of moscow )
the whole mass of prisoners suddenly started to one side and exclamations of horror and disgust were heard .
" ah , the villains !
what heathens !
yes ; dead , dead , so he is ...
and smeared with something ! "
pierre too drew near the church where the thing was that evoked these exclamations , and dimly made out something leaning against the palings surrounding the church .
from the words of his comrades who saw better than he did , he found that this was the body of a man , set upright against the palings with its face smeared with soot .
" go on !
what the devil ...
go on !
thirty thousand devils ! ...
" the convoy guards began cursing and the french soldiers , with fresh virulence , drove away with their swords the crowd of prisoners who were gazing at the dead man .
chapter xiv
at the bridge they all halted , waiting for those in front to get across .
from the bridge they had a view of endless lines of moving baggage trains before and behind them .
to the right , where the kal'uga road turns near nesk'uchny , endless rows of troops and carts stretched away into the distance .
these were troops of beauharnais ' corps which had started before any of the others .
behind , along the riverside and across the stone bridge , were ney 's troops and transport .
davout 's troops , in whose charge were the prisoners , were crossing the crimean bridge and some were already debouching into the kal'uga road .
when they had crossed the crimean bridge the prisoners moved a few steps forward , halted , and again moved on , and from all sides vehicles and men crowded closer and closer together .
from all sides , like the roar of the sea , were heard the rattle of wheels , the tramp of feet , and incessant shouts of anger and abuse .
pierre stood pressed against the wall of a charred house , listening to that noise which mingled in his imagination with the roll of the drums .
to get a better view , several officer prisoners climbed onto the wall of the half - burned house against which pierre was leaning .
" what crowds !
just look at the crowds ! ...
they 've loaded goods even on the cannon !
look there , those are furs ! "
they exclaimed . "
just see what the blackguards have looted ....
there !
see what that one has behind in the cart ....
why , those are settings taken from some icons , by heaven ! ...
oh , the rascals ! ...
see how that fellow has loaded himself up , he can hardly walk !
good lord , they 've even grabbed those chaises ! ...
see that fellow there sitting on the trunks ....
heavens !
they 're fighting . "
" that 's right , hit him on the snout - on his snout !
like this , we sha n't get away before evening .
look , look there ....
why , that must be napoleon 's own .
see what horses !
and the monograms with a crown !
it 's like a portable house ....
that fellow 's dropped his sack and does n't see it .
fighting again ...
a woman with a baby , and not bad - looking either !
yes , i dare say , that 's the way they 'll let you pass ....
just look , there 's no end to it .
russian wenches , by heaven , so they are !
in carriages - see how comfortably they 've settled themselves ! "
in three carriages involved among the munition carts , closely squeezed together , sat women with rouged faces , dressed in glaring colors , who were shouting something in shrill voices .
all that he now witnessed scarcely made an impression on him - as if his soul , making ready for a hard struggle , refused to receive impressions that might weaken it .
the women 's vehicles drove by .
behind them came more carts , soldiers , wagons , soldiers , gun carriages , carriages , soldiers , ammunition carts , more soldiers , and now and then women .
pierre did not see the people as individuals but saw their movement .
all these people and horses seemed driven forward by some invisible power .
they marched very quickly , without resting , and halted only when the sun began to set .
the baggage carts drew up close together and the men began to prepare for their night 's rest .
they all appeared angry and dissatisfied .
for a long time , oaths , angry shouts , and fighting could be heard from all sides .
a carriage that followed the escort ran into one of the carts and knocked a hole in it with its pole .
once at a standstill they all seemed to understand that they did not yet know where they were going , and that much that was painful and difficult awaited them on this journey .
during this halt the escort treated the prisoners even worse than they had done at the start .
it was here that the prisoners for the first time received horseflesh for their meat ration .
from the officer down to the lowest soldier they showed what seemed like personal spite against each of the prisoners , in unexpected contrast to their former friendly relations .
this spite increased still more when , on calling over the roll of prisoners , it was found that in the bustle of leaving moscow one russian soldier , who had pretended to suffer from colic , had escaped .
to the noncommissioned officer 's excuse that the prisoner was ill and could not walk , the officer replied that the order was to shoot those who lagged behind .
pierre felt that that fatal force which had crushed him during the executions , but which he had not felt during his imprisonment , now again controlled his existence .
it was terrible , but he felt that in proportion to the efforts of that fatal force to crush him , there grew and strengthened in his soul a power of life independent of it .
he ate his supper of buckwheat soup with horseflesh and chatted with his comrades .
as if in reaction against the worsening of their position they were all particularly animated and gay .
they spoke of personal reminiscences , of amusing scenes they had witnessed during the campaign , and avoided all talk of their present situation .
the sun had set long since .
bright stars shone out here and there in the sky .
a red glow as of a conflagration spread above the horizon from the rising full moon , and that vast red ball swayed strangely in the gray haze .
it grew light .
the evening was ending , but the night had not yet come .
pierre got up and left his new companions , crossing between the campfires to the other side of the road where he had been told the common soldier prisoners were stationed .
he wanted to talk to them .
on the road he was stopped by a french sentinel who ordered him back .
pierre turned back , not to his companions by the campfire , but to an unharnessed cart where there was nobody .
tucking his legs under him and dropping his head he sat down on the cold ground by the wheel of the cart and remained motionless a long while sunk in thought .
suddenly he burst out into a fit of his broad , good - natured laughter , so loud that men from various sides turned with surprise to see what this strange and evidently solitary laughter could mean .
" ha - ha - ha ! " laughed pierre .
and he said aloud to himself : " the soldier did not let me pass .
they took me and shut me up .
they hold me captive .
what , me ?
me ?
my immortal soul ?
ha - ha - ha !
ha - ha - ha ! ...
" and he laughed till tears started to his eyes .
a man got up and came to see what this queer big fellow was laughing at all by himself .
pierre stopped laughing , got up , went farther away from the inquisitive man , and looked around him .
the huge , endless bivouac that had previously resounded with the crackling of campfires and the voices of many men had grown quiet , the red campfires were growing paler and dying down .
high up in the light sky hung the full moon .
forests and fields beyond the camp , unseen before , were now visible in the distance .
and farther still , beyond those forests and fields , the bright , oscillating , limitless distance lured one to itself .
pierre glanced up at the sky and the twinkling stars in its faraway depths . "
and all that is me , all that is within me , and it is all i ! " thought pierre . "
and they caught all that and put it into a shed boarded up with planks ! "
he smiled , and went and lay down to sleep beside his companions .
chapter xv
in the early days of october another envoy came to kut'uzov with a letter from napoleon proposing peace and falsely dated from moscow , though napoleon was already not far from kut'uzov on the old kal'uga road .
kut'uzov replied to this letter as he had done to the one formerly brought by lauriston , saying that there could be no question of peace .
the soldiers and officers again demanded action .
generals on the staff , excited by the memory of the easy victory at tar'utino , urged kut'uzov to carry out d'orokhov 's suggestion .
kut'uzov did not consider any offensive necessary .
the result was a compromise which was inevitable : a small detachment was sent to form'insk to attack broussier .
at austerlitz he remained last at the augezd dam , rallying the regiments , saving what was possible when all were flying and perishing and not a single general was left in the rear guard .
ill with fever he went to smol'ensk with twenty thousand men to defend the town against napoleon 's whole army .
in smol'ensk , at the mal'akhov gate , he had hardly dozed off in a paroxysm of fever before he was awakened by the bombardment of the town - and smol'ensk held out all day long .
and the quiet little dokht'urov rode thither , and borodin'o became the greatest glory of the russian army .
many heroes have been described to us in verse and prose , but of dokht'urov scarcely a word has been said .
and this silence about dokht'urov is the clearest testimony to his merit .
at that time dokht'urov had under his command , besides d'orokhov 's detachment , the two small guerrilla detachments of figner and sesl'avin .
on the evening of october 11 sesl'avin came to the arist'ovo headquarters with a french guardsman he had captured .
the prisoner said that the troops that had entered form'insk that day were the vanguard of the whole army , that napoleon was there and the whole army had left moscow four days previously .
that same evening a house serf who had come from b'orovsk said he had seen an immense army entering the town .
some cossacks of dokht'urov 's detachment reported having sighted the french guards marching along the road to b'orovsk .
from all these reports it was evident that where they had expected to meet a single division there was now the whole french army marching from moscow in an unexpected direction - along the kal'uga road .
dokht'urov was unwilling to undertake any action , as it was not clear to him now what he ought to do .
he had been ordered to attack form'insk .
but only broussier had been there at that time and now the whole french army was there .
erm'olov wished to act on his own judgment , but dokht'urov insisted that he must have kut'uzov 's instructions .
so it was decided to send a dispatch to the staff .
for this purpose a capable officer , bolkhov'itinov , was chosen , who was to explain the whole affair by word of mouth , besides delivering a written report .
toward midnight bolkhov'itinov , having received the dispatch and verbal instructions , galloped off to the general staff accompanied by a cossack with spare horses .
chapter xvi
it was a warm , dark , autumn night .
it had been raining for four days .
having changed horses twice and galloped twenty miles in an hour and a half over a sticky , muddy road , bolkhov'itinov reached litash"evka after one o'clock at night .
dismounting at a cottage on whose wattle fence hung a signboard , general staff , and throwing down his reins , he entered a dark passage .
" the general on duty , quick !
it 's very important ! "
said he to someone who had risen and was sniffing in the dark passage .
" he has been very unwell since the evening and this is the third night he has not slept , " said the orderly pleadingly in a whisper .
" you should wake the captain first . "
" but this is very important , from general dokht'urov , " said bolkhov'itinov , entering the open door which he had found by feeling in the dark .
the orderly had gone in before him and began waking somebody .
" your honor , your honor !
a courier . "
" what ?
what 's that ?
from whom ? " came a sleepy voice .
" from dokht'urov and from alex'ey petr'ovich .
napoleon is at form'insk , " said bolkhov'itinov , unable to see in the dark who was speaking but guessing by the voice that it was not konovn'itsyn .
the man who had wakened yawned and stretched himself .
" i do n't like waking him , " he said , fumbling for something . "
he is very ill .
perhaps this is only a rumor . "
" here is the dispatch , " said bolkhov'itinov .
" my orders are to give it at once to the general on duty . "
" wait a moment , i 'll light a candle .
you damned rascal , where do you always hide it ? " said the voice of the man who was stretching himself , to the orderly .
( this was shcherb'inin , konovn'itsyn 's adjutant . )
" i 've found it , i 've found it ! "
he added .
the orderly was striking a light and shcherb'inin was fumbling for something on the candlestick .
" oh , the nasty beasts ! " said he with disgust .
by the light of the sparks bolkhov'itinov saw shcherb'inin 's youthful face as he held the candle , and the face of another man who was still asleep .
this was konovn'itsyn .
bolkhov'itinov was bespattered all over with mud and had smeared his face by wiping it with his sleeve .
" who gave the report ? " inquired shcherb'inin , taking the envelope .
" the news is reliable , " said bolkhov'itinov .
"
prisoners , cossacks , and the scouts all say the same thing . "
" there 's nothing to be done , we 'll have to wake him , " said shcherb'inin , rising and going up to the man in the nightcap who lay covered by a greatcoat . "
peter petr'ovich ! " said he .
( konovn'itsyn did not stir . )
"
to the general staff !
" he said with a smile , knowing that those words would be sure to arouse him .
and in fact the head in the nightcap was lifted at once .
" well , what is it ?
from whom ? " he asked immediately but without hurry , blinking at the light .
while listening to the officer 's report konovn'itsyn broke the seal and read the dispatch .
hardly had he done so before he lowered his legs in their woolen stockings to the earthen floor and began putting on his boots .
then he took off his nightcap , combed his hair over his temples , and donned his cap .
" did you get here quickly ?
let us go to his highness . "
konovn'itsyn had understood at once that the news brought was of great importance and that no time must be lost .
he did not consider or ask himself whether the news was good or bad .
that did not interest him .
he regarded the whole business of the war not with his intelligence or his reason but by something else .
there was within him a deep unexpressed conviction that all would be well , but that one must not trust to this and still less speak about it , but must only attend to one 's own work .
and he did his work , giving his whole strength to the task .
peter petr'ovich konovn'itsyn , like dokht'urov , seems to have been included merely for propriety 's sake in the list of the so - called heroes of 1812-the barclays , ra'evskis , erm'olovs , pl'atovs , and milor'adoviches .
like dokht'urov he had the reputation of being a man of very limited capacity and information , and like dokht'urov he never made plans of battle but was always found where the situation was most difficult .
since his appointment as general on duty he had always slept with his door open , giving orders that every messenger should be allowed to wake him up .
and this premonition was disagreeable to him though he knew it could not be helped .
chapter xvii
kut'uzov like all old people did not sleep much at night .
he often fell asleep unexpectedly in the daytime , but at night , lying on his bed without undressing , he generally remained awake thinking .
so he lay now on his bed , supporting his large , heavy , scarred head on his plump hand , with his one eye open , meditating and peering into the darkness .
the lesson of the tar'utino battle and of the day before it , which kut'uzov remembered with pain , must , he thought , have some effect on others too .
" they must understand that we can only lose by taking the offensive .
patience and time are my warriors , my champions , " thought kut'uzov .
he knew that an apple should not be plucked while it is green .
it will fall of itself when ripe , but if picked unripe the apple is spoiled , the tree is harmed , and your teeth are set on edge .
like an experienced sportsman he knew that the beast was wounded , and wounded as only the whole strength of russia could have wounded it , but whether it was mortally wounded or not was still an undecided question .
now by the fact of lauriston and barth'elemi having been sent , and by the reports of the guerrillas , kut'uzov was almost sure that the wound was mortal .
but he needed further proofs and it was necessary to wait .
" they want to run to see how they have wounded it .
wait and we shall see !
continual maneuvers , continual advances ! " thought he . "
what for ?
only to distinguish themselves !
as if fighting were fun .
they are like children from whom one ca n't get any sensible account of what has happened because they all want to show how well they can fight .
but that 's not what is needed now .
" and what ingenious maneuvers they all propose to me !
it seems to them that when they have thought of two or three contingencies " ( he remembered the general plan sent him from petersburg ) " they have foreseen everything .
but the contingencies are endless . "
the undecided question as to whether the wound inflicted at borodin'o was mortal or not had hung over kut'uzov 's head for a whole month .
on the one hand the french had occupied moscow .
on the other kut'uzov felt assured with all his being that the terrible blow into which he and all the russians had put their whole strength must have been mortal .
but in any case proofs were needed ; he had waited a whole month for them and grew more impatient the longer he waited .
lying on his bed during those sleepless nights he did just what he reproached those younger generals for doing .
he imagined all sorts of possible contingencies , just like the younger men , but with this difference , that he saw thousands of contingencies instead of two or three and based nothing on them .
the longer he thought the more contingencies presented themselves .
he imagined all sorts of movements of the napoleonic army as a whole or in sections - against petersburg , or against him , or to outflank him .
he thought too of the possibility ( which he feared most of all ) that napoleon might fight him with his own weapon and remain in moscow awaiting him .
but these were only suppositions , which seemed important to the younger men but not to kut'uzov .
and the more he desired it the less he allowed himself to believe it .
this question absorbed all his mental powers .
all else was to him only life 's customary routine .
but the destruction of the french , which he alone foresaw , was his heart 's one desire .
on the night of the eleventh of october he lay leaning on his arm and thinking of that .
there was a stir in the next room and he heard the steps of toll , konovn'itsyn , and bolkhov'itinov .
" eh , who 's there ?
come in , come in !
what news ?
" the field marshal called out to them .
while a footman was lighting a candle , toll communicated the substance of the news .
" who brought it ? " asked kut'uzov with a look which , when the candle was lit , struck toll by its cold severity .
" there can be no doubt about it , your highness . "
" call him in , call him here . "
kut'uzov sat up with one leg hanging down from the bed and his big paunch resting against the other which was doubled under him .
he screwed up his seeing eye to scrutinize the messenger more carefully , as if wishing to read in his face what preoccupied his own mind .
" tell me , tell me , friend , " said he to bolkhov'itinov in his low , aged voice , as he pulled together the shirt which gaped open on his chest , " come nearer - nearer .
what news have you brought me ?
eh ?
that napoleon has left moscow ?
are you sure ?
eh ? "
bolkhov'itinov gave a detailed account from the beginning of all he had been told to report .
" speak quicker , quicker !
do n't torture me ! "
kut'uzov interrupted him .
bolkhov'itinov told him everything and was then silent , awaiting instructions .
toll was beginning to say something but kut'uzov checked him .
" o lord , my creator , thou has heard our prayer ... " said he in a tremulous voice with folded hands .
" russia is saved .
i thank thee , o lord ! " and he wept .
chapter xviii
dokht'urov went to m'alo - yarosl'avets , but kut'uzov lingered with the main army and gave orders for the evacuation of kal'uga - a retreat beyond which town seemed to him quite possible .
everywhere kut'uzov retreated , but the enemy without waiting for his retreat fled in the opposite direction .
napoleon 's historians describe to us his skilled maneuvers at tar'utino and m'alo - yarosl'avets , and make conjectures as to what would have happened had napoleon been in time to penetrate into the rich southern provinces .
that army could not recover anywhere .
since the battle of borodin'o and the pillage of moscow it had borne within itself , as it were , the chemical elements of dissolution .
but though they all realized that it was necessary to get away , there still remained a feeling of shame at admitting that they must flee .
an external shock was needed to overcome that shame , and this shock came in due time .
it was what the french called " le hourra de l'empereur . "
some cossacks on the prowl for booty fell in with the emperor and very nearly captured him .
if the cossacks did not capture napoleon then , what saved him was the very thing that was destroying the french army , the booty on which the cossacks fell .
here as at tar'utino they went after plunder , leaving the men .
disregarding napoleon they rushed after the plunder and napoleon managed to escape .
chapter xix
a man in motion always devises an aim for that motion .
to be able to go a thousand miles he must imagine that something good awaits him at the end of those thousand miles .
one must have the prospect of a promised land to have the strength to move .
the promised land for the french during their advance had been moscow , during their retreat it was their native land .
and the impulses felt by a single person are always magnified in a crowd .
so both those who knew and those who did not know deceived themselves , and pushed on to smol'ensk as to a promised land .
coming out onto the highroad the french fled with surprising energy and unheard - of rapidity toward the goal they had fixed on .
besides the common impulse which bound the whole crowd of french into one mass and supplied them with a certain energy , there was another cause binding them together - their great numbers .
as with the physical law of gravity , their enormous mass drew the individual human atoms to itself .
in their hundreds of thousands they moved like a whole nation .
their very numbers and their crowded and swift movement deprived them of that possibility and rendered it not only difficult but impossible for the russians to stop this movement , to which the french were directing all their energies .
beyond a certain limit no mechanical disruption of the body could hasten the process of decomposition .
a lump of snow can not be melted instantaneously .
there is a certain limit of time in less than which no amount of heat can melt the snow .
on the contrary the greater the heat the more solidified the remaining snow becomes .
of the russian commanders kut'uzov alone understood this .
when the flight of the french army along the smol'ensk road became well defined , what konovn'itsyn had foreseen on the night of the eleventh of october began to occur .
the superior officers all wanted to distinguish themselves , to cut off , to seize , to capture , and to overthrow the french , and all clamored for action .
kut'uzov alone used all his power ( and such power is very limited in the case of any commander in chief ) to prevent an attack .
he could not tell them what we say now : " why fight , why block the road , losing our own men and inhumanly slaughtering unfortunate wretches ?
what is the use of that , when a third of their army has melted away on the road from moscow to vy'azma without any battle ? "
but drawing from his aged wisdom what they could understand , he told them of the golden bridge , and they laughed at and slandered him , flinging themselves on , rending and exulting over the dying beast .
erm'olov , milor'adovich , pl'atov , and others in proximity to the french near vy'azma could not resist their desire to cut off and break up two french corps , and by way of reporting their intention to kut'uzov
they sent him a blank sheet of paper in an envelope .
and try as kut'uzov might to restrain the troops , our men attacked , trying to bar the road .
infantry regiments , we are told , advanced to the attack with music and with drums beating , and killed and lost thousands of men .
but they did not cut off or overthrow anybody and the french army , closing up more firmly at the danger , continued , while steadily melting away , to pursue its fatal path to smol'ensk .
book fourteen : 1812
chapter i
the battle of borodin'o , with the occupation of moscow that followed it and the flight of the french without further conflicts , is one of the most instructive phenomena in history .
an army gains a victory , and at once the rights of the conquering nation have increased to the detriment of the defeated .
an army has suffered defeat , and at once a people loses its rights in proportion to the severity of the reverse , and if its army suffers a complete defeat the nation is quite subjugated .
so according to history it has been found from the most ancient times , and so it is to our own day .
all napoleon 's wars serve to confirm this rule .
in proportion to the defeat of the austrian army austria loses its rights , and the rights and the strength of france increase .
the victories of the french at jena and auerst"adt destroy the independent existence of prussia .
but then , in 1812 , the french gain a victory near moscow .
moscow is taken and after that , with no further battles , it is not russia that ceases to exist , but the french army of six hundred thousand , and then napoleonic france itself .
after the french victory at borodin'o there was no general engagement nor any that were at all serious , yet the french army ceased to exist .
what does this mean ?
that was a misfortune no one could remedy , for the peasants of the district burned their hay rather than let the french have it .
let us imagine two men who have come out to fight a duel with rapiers according to all the rules of the art of fencing .
one can imagine what confusion and obscurity would result from such an account of the duel .
after the burning of smol'ensk a war began which did not follow any previous traditions of war .
chapter ii
one of the most obvious and advantageous departures from the so - called laws of war is the action of scattered groups against men pressed together in a mass .
such action always occurs in wars that take on a national character .
in such actions , instead of two crowds opposing each other , the men disperse , attack singly , run away when attacked by stronger forces , but again attack when opportunity offers .
this was done by the guerrillas in spain , by the mountain tribes in the caucasus , and by the russians in 1812 .
people have called this kind of war " guerrilla warfare " and assume that by so calling it they have explained its meaning .
but such a war does not fit in under any rule and is directly opposed to a well - known rule of tactics which is accepted as infallible .
that rule says that an attacker should concentrate his forces in order to be stronger than his opponent at the moment of conflict .
guerrilla war ( always successful , as history shows ) directly infringes that rule .
this contradiction arises from the fact that military science assumes the strength of an army to be identical with its numbers .
military science says that the more troops the greater the strength .
les gros bataillons ont toujours raison . *
* large battalions are always victorious .
for military science to say this is like defining momentum in mechanics by reference to the mass only : stating that momenta are equal or unequal to each other simply because the masses involved are equal or unequal .
momentum ( quantity of motion ) is the product of mass and velocity .
in military affairs the strength of an army is the product of its mass and some unknown x.
but the assignment of these various meanings to the factor does not yield results which accord with the historic facts .
yet it is only necessary to abandon the false view ( adopted to gratify the " heroes " ) of the efficacy of the directions issued in wartime by commanders , in order to find this unknown quantity .
men who want to fight will always put themselves in the most advantageous conditions for fighting .
the spirit of an army is the factor which multiplied by the mass gives the resulting force .
to define and express the significance of this unknown factor - the spirit of an army - is a problem for science .
only then , expressing known historic facts by equations and comparing the relative significance of this factor , can we hope to define the unknown .
consequently the four were equal to the fifteen , and therefore 4x = 15y .
consequently x / y = 15/4 .
this equation does not give us the value of the unknown factor but gives us a ratio between two unknowns .
and by bringing variously selected historic units ( battles , campaigns , periods of war ) into such equations , a series of numbers could be obtained in which certain laws should exist and might be discovered .
the tactical rule that an army should act in masses when attacking , and in smaller groups in retreat , unconsciously confirms the truth that the strength of an army depends on its spirit .
to lead men forward under fire more discipline ( obtainable only by movement in masses ) is needed than is needed to resist attacks .
chapter iii
the so - called partisan war began with the entry of the french into smol'ensk .
on august 24 dav'ydov 's first partisan detachment was formed and then others were recognized .
the further the campaign progressed the more numerous these detachments became .
the irregulars destroyed the great army piecemeal .
they gathered the fallen leaves that dropped of themselves from that withered tree - the french army - and sometimes shook that tree itself .
by october , when the french were fleeing toward smol'ensk , there were hundreds of such companies , of various sizes and characters .
there were some that adopted all the army methods and had infantry , artillery , staffs , and the comforts of life .
others consisted solely of cossack cavalry .
there were also small scratch groups of foot and horse , and groups of peasants and landowners that remained unknown .
a sacristan commanded one party which captured several hundred prisoners in the course of a month ; and there was vas'ilisa , the wife of a village elder , who slew hundreds of the french .
the partisan warfare flamed up most fiercely in the latter days of october .
by the end of october this kind of warfare had taken definite shape : it had become clear to all what could be ventured against the french and what could not .
now only the commanders of detachments with staffs , and moving according to rules at a distance from the french , still regarded many things as impossible .
the small bands that had started their activities long before and had already observed the french closely considered things possible which the commanders of the big detachments did not dare to contemplate .
the cossacks and peasants who crept in among the french now considered everything possible .
on october 22 , den'isov ( who was one of the irregulars ) was with his group at the height of the guerrilla enthusiasm .
since early morning he and his party had been on the move .
two of the commanders of large parties - one a pole and the other a german - sent invitations to den'isov almost simultaneously , requesting him to join up with their divisions to attack the convoy .
to the polish general he replied to the same effect , informing him that he was already under the command of the german .
having arranged matters thus , den'isov and d'olokhov intended , without reporting matters to the higher command , to attack and seize that convoy with their own small forces .
on october 22 it was moving from the village of mik'ulino to that of sh'amshevo .
to the left of the road between mik'ulino and sh'amshevo there were large forests , extending in some places up to the road itself though in others a mile or more back from it .
through these forests den'isov and his party rode all day , sometimes keeping well back in them and sometimes coming to the very edge , but never losing sight of the moving french .
since then , and until evening , the party had watched the movements of the french without attacking .
in their rear , more than a mile from mik'ulino where the forest came right up to the road , six cossacks were posted to report if any fresh columns of french should show themselves .
beyond sh'amshevo , d'olokhov was to observe the road in the same way , to find out at what distance there were other french troops .
they reckoned that the convoy had fifteen hundred men .
den'isov had two hundred , and d'olokhov might have as many more , but the disparity of numbers did not deter den'isov .
all that he now wanted to know was what troops these were and to learn that he had to capture a " tongue "- that is , a man from the enemy column .
chapter iv
it was a warm rainy autumn day .
the sky and the horizon were both the color of muddy water .
at times a sort of mist descended , and then suddenly heavy slanting rain came down .
den'isov in a felt cloak and a sheepskin cap from which the rain ran down was riding a thin thoroughbred horse with sunken sides .
like his horse , which turned its head and laid its ears back , he shrank from the driving rain and gazed anxiously before him .
his thin face with its short , thick black beard looked angry .
beside den'isov rode an esaul , * den'isov 's fellow worker , also in felt cloak and sheepskin cap , and riding a large sleek don horse .
* a captain of cossacks .
esaul lov'ayski
the third was a tall man as straight as an arrow , pale - faced , fair - haired , with narrow light eyes and with calm self - satisfaction in his face and bearing .
a little ahead of them walked a peasant guide , wet to the skin and wearing a gray peasant coat and a white knitted cap .
a little behind , on a poor , small , lean kirgh'iz mount with an enormous tail and mane and a bleeding mouth , rode a young officer in a blue french overcoat .
beside him rode an hussar , with a boy in a tattered french uniform and blue cap behind him on the crupper of his horse .
the boy held on to the hussar with cold , red hands , and raising his eyebrows gazed about him with surprise .
this was the french drummer boy captured that morning .
behind them along the narrow , sodden , cutup forest road came hussars in threes and fours , and then cossacks : some in felt cloaks , some in french greatcoats , and some with horsecloths over their heads .
the horses , being drenched by the rain , all looked black whether chestnut or bay .
their necks , with their wet , close - clinging manes , looked strangely thin .
steam rose from them .
clothes , saddles , reins , were all wet , slippery , and sodden , like the ground and the fallen leaves that strewed the road .
den'isov 's horse swerved aside to avoid a pool in the track and bumped his rider 's knee against a tree .
" oh , the devil ! "
exclaimed den'isov angrily , and showing his teeth he struck his horse three times with his whip , splashing himself and his comrades with mud .
" there 'll hardly be another such chance to fall on a transport as today .
on coming to a path in the forest along which he could see far to the right , den'isov stopped .
" there 's someone coming , " said he .
the esaul looked in the direction den'isov indicated .
" there are two , an officer and a cossack .
but it is not presupposable that it is the lieutenant colonel himself , " said the esaul , who was fond of using words the cossacks did not know .
the approaching riders having descended a decline were no longer visible , but they reappeared a few minutes later .
in front , at a weary gallop and using his leather whip , rode an officer , disheveled and drenched , whose trousers had worked up to above his knees .
behind him , standing in the stirrups , trotted a cossack .
the officer , a very young lad with a broad rosy face and keen merry eyes , galloped up to den'isov and handed him a sodden envelope .
" from the general , " said the officer . "
please excuse its not being quite dry . "
den'isov , frowning , took the envelope and opened it .
" there , they kept telling us : ' it 's dangerous , it 's dangerous , ' " said the officer , addressing the esaul while den'isov was reading the dispatch . "
but komar'ov and i "- he pointed to the cossack-"were prepared .
we have each of us two pistols ....
but what 's this ?
" he asked , noticing the french drummer boy . "
a prisoner ?
you 've already been in action ?
may i speak to him ? "
" wost'ov ! p'etya ! " exclaimed den'isov , having run through the dispatch .
" why did n't you say who you were ? " and turning with a smile he held out his hand to the lad .
the officer was p'etya rost'ov .
all the way p'etya had been preparing himself to behave with den'isov as befitted a grown - up man and an officer - without hinting at their previous acquaintance .
" well , i am glad to see you , " den'isov interrupted him , and his face again assumed its anxious expression .
" michael feokl'itych , " said he to the esaul , " this is again fwom that german , you know .
he "-
he indicated p'etya-"is serving under him . "
and den'isov told the esaul that the dispatch just delivered was a repetition of the german general 's demand that he should join forces with him for an attack on the transport .
" if we do n't take it tomowwow , he 'll snatch it fwom under our noses , " he added .
" orders ? "
den'isov repeated thoughtfully . "
but can you stay till tomowwow ? "
" oh , please ...
may i stay with you ? "
cried p'etya .
" but , just what did the genewal tell you ?
to weturn at once ? " asked den'isov .
p'etya blushed .
" he gave me no instructions .
i think i could ?
" he returned , inquiringly .
" well , all wight , " said den'isov .
den'isov himself intended going with the esaul and p'etya to the edge of the forest where it reached out to sh'amshevo , to have a look at the part of the french bivouac they were to attack next day .
" well , old fellow , " said he to the peasant guide , " lead us to sh'amshevo . "
den'isov , p'etya , and the esaul , accompanied by some cossacks and the hussar who had the prisoner , rode to the left across a ravine to the edge of the forest .
chapter v
the rain had stopped , and only the mist was falling and drops from the trees .
den'isov , the esaul , and p'etya
he ascended an incline , stopped , looked about him , and advanced to where the screen of trees was less dense .
on reaching a large oak tree that had not yet shed its leaves , he stopped and beckoned mysteriously to them with his hand .
den'isov and p'etya rode up to him .
from the spot where the peasant was standing they could see the french .
immediately beyond the forest , on a downward slope , lay a field of spring rye .
to the right , beyond a steep ravine , was a small village and a landowner 's house with a broken roof .
their un - russian shouting at their horses which were straining uphill with the carts , and their calls to one another , could be clearly heard .
" bwing the prisoner here , " said den'isov in a low voice , not taking his eyes off the french .
a cossack dismounted , lifted the boy down , and took him to den'isov .
pointing to the french troops , den'isov asked him what these and those of them were .
den'isov turned away from him frowning and addressed the esaul , conveying his own conjectures to him .
" whether d'olokhov comes or not , we must seize it , eh ? " said den'isov with a merry sparkle in his eyes .
" it is a very suitable spot , " said the esaul .
" we 'll send the infantwy down by the swamps , " den'isov continued .
" they 'll cweep up to the garden ; you 'll wide up fwom there with the cossacks "-
he pointed to a spot in the forest beyond the village-"and i with my hussars fwom here .
and at the signal shot ... "
" the hollow is impassable - there 's a swamp there , " said the esaul .
" the horses would sink .
we must ride round more to the left .... "
for a moment den'isov and the esaul drew back .
they were so near that they thought they were the cause of the firing and shouting .
but the firing and shouting did not relate to them .
down below , a man wearing something red was running through the marsh .
the french were evidently firing and shouting at him .
" why , that 's our t'ikhon , " said the esaul .
" so it is !
it is ! "
" the wascal ! " said den'isov .
" he 'll get away ! " said the esaul , screwing up his eyes .
the french who had been pursuing him stopped .
" smart , that ! " said the esaul .
" what a beast ! " said den'isov with his former look of vexation .
" what has he been doing all this time ? "
" who is he ? " asked p'etya .
" he 's our plast'un .
i sent him to capture a ' tongue . ' "
" oh , yes , " said p'etya , nodding at the first words den'isov uttered as if he understood it all , though he really did not understand anything of it .
t'ikhon shcherb'aty was one of the most indispensable men in their band .
he was a peasant from pokr'ovsk , near the river gzhat .
" we do n't do the french any harm , " said t'ikhon , evidently frightened by den'isov 's words .
" we only fooled about with the lads for fun , you know !
we killed a score or so of ' more - orderers , ' but we did no harm else .... "
next day when den'isov had left pokr'ovsk , having quite forgotten about this peasant , it was reported to him that t'ikhon had attached himself to their party and asked to be allowed to remain with it .
den'isov gave orders to let him do so .
t'ikhon , who at first did rough work , laying campfires , fetching water , flaying dead horses , and so on , soon showed a great liking and aptitude for partisan warfare .
at night he would go out for booty and always brought back french clothing and weapons , and when told to would bring in french captives also .
den'isov then relieved him from drudgery and began taking him with him when he went out on expeditions and had him enrolled among the cossacks .
t'ikhon did not like riding , and always went on foot , never lagging behind the cavalry .
t'ikhon with equal accuracy would split logs with blows at arm 's length , or holding the head of the ax would cut thin little pegs or carve spoons .
in den'isov 's party he held a peculiar and exceptional position .
" it wo n't hurt that devil - he 's as strong as a horse ! "
they said of him .
once a frenchman t'ikhon was trying to capture fired a pistol at him and shot him in the fleshy part of the back .
that wound ( which t'ikhon treated only with internal and external applications of vodka ) was the subject of the liveliest jokes by the whole detachment - jokes in which t'ikhon readily joined .
" hallo , mate !
never again ?
gave you a twist ? "
the cossacks would banter him .
and t'ikhon , purposely writhing and making faces , pretended to be angry and swore at the french with the funniest curses .
the only effect of this incident on t'ikhon was that after being wounded he seldom brought in prisoners .
he was the bravest and most useful man in the party .
no one found more opportunities for attacking , no one captured or killed more frenchmen , and consequently he was made the buffoon of all the cossacks and hussars and willingly accepted that role .
now he had been sent by den'isov overnight to sh'amshevo to capture a " tongue . "
chapter vi
" now , my lad , we 'll go and get dwy , " he said to p'etya .
as they approached the watchhouse den'isov stopped , peering into the forest .
among the trees a man with long legs and long , swinging arms , wearing a short jacket , bast shoes , and a kaz'an hat , was approaching with long , light steps .
he had a musketoon over his shoulder and an ax stuck in his girdle .
when he espied den'isov he hastily threw something into the bushes , removed his sodden hat by its floppy brim , and approached his commander .
it was t'ikhon .
his wrinkled and pockmarked face and narrow little eyes beamed with self - satisfied merriment .
he lifted his head high and gazed at den'isov as if repressing a laugh .
" well , where did you disappear to ? " inquired den'isov .
" where did i disappear to ?
i went to get frenchmen , " answered t'ikhon boldly and hurriedly , in a husky but melodious bass voice .
" why did you push yourself in there by daylight ?
you ass !
well , why have n't you taken one ? "
" oh , i took one all right , " said t'ikhon .
" where is he ? "
" you see , i took him first thing at dawn , " t'ikhon continued , spreading out his flat feet with outturned toes in their bast shoes .
" i took him into the forest .
then i see he 's no good and think i 'll go and fetch a likelier one . "
" you see ? ...
what a wogue - it 's just as i thought , " said den'isov to the esaul .
" why did n't you bwing that one ? "
" what was the good of bringing him ? "
t'ikhon interrupted hastily and angrily-"that one would n't have done for you .
as if i do n't know what sort you want ! "
" what a bwute you are ! ...
well ? "
" i went for another one , " t'ikhon continued , " and i crept like this through the wood and lay down . "
( he suddenly lay down on his stomach with a supple movement to show how he had done it . )
" one turned up and i grabbed him , like this . "
( he jumped up quickly and lightly . )
" ' come along to the colonel , ' i said .
he starts yelling , and suddenly there were four of them .
they rushed at me with their little swords .
so i went for them with my ax , this way : '
what are you up to ? ' says i. ' christ be with you ! '
" shouted t'ikhon , waving his arms with an angry scowl and throwing out his chest .
" yes , we saw from the hill how you took to your heels through the puddles ! " said the esaul , screwing up his glittering eyes .
p'etya badly wanted to laugh , but noticed that they all refrained from laughing .
he turned his eyes rapidly from t'ikhon 's face to the esaul 's and den'isov 's , unable to make out what it all meant .
" do n't play the fool ! " said den'isov , coughing angrily . "
why did n't you bwing the first one ? "
den'isov smiled , and p'etya burst into a peal of merry laughter in which t'ikhon himself joined .
" oh , but he was a regular good - for - nothing , " said t'ikhon .
" the clothes on him - poor stuff !
how could i bring him ?
and so rude , your honor !
why , he says : ' i 'm a general 's son myself , i wo n't go ! '
he says . "
" you are a bwute ! " said den'isov .
" i wanted to question ... "
" but i questioned him , " said t'ikhon .
" he said he did n't know much . '
there are a lot of us , ' he says , ' but all poor stuff - only soldiers in name , ' he says . '
shout loud at them , ' he says , ' and you 'll take them all , ' " t'ikhon concluded , looking cheerfully and resolutely into den'isov 's eyes .
" i 'll give you a hundwed sharp lashes - that'll teach you to play the fool ! " said den'isov severely .
" but why are you angry ? " remonstrated t'ikhon , " just as if i 'd never seen your frenchmen !
only wait till it gets dark and i 'll fetch you any of them
you want - three if you like . "
" well , let 's go , " said den'isov , and rode all the way to the watchhouse in silence and frowning angrily .
t'ikhon followed behind and p'etya heard the cossacks laughing with him and at him , about some pair of boots he had thrown into the bushes .
when the fit of laughter that had seized him at t'ikhon 's words and smile had passed and p'etya realized for a moment that this t'ikhon had killed a man , he felt uneasy .
he looked round at the captive drummer boy and felt a pang in his heart .
but this uneasiness lasted only a moment .
the officer who had been sent to inquire met den'isov on the way with the news that d'olokhov was soon coming and that all was well with him .
den'isov at once cheered up and , calling p'etya to him , said : " well , tell me about yourself . "
chapter vii
p'etya , having left his people after their departure from moscow , joined his regiment and was soon taken as orderly by a general commanding a large guerrilla detachment .
and he was always in a hurry to get where he was not .
when on the twenty - first of october his general expressed a wish to send somebody to den'isov 's detachment , p'etya begged so piteously to be sent that the general could not refuse .
so now the general explicitly forbade his taking part in any action whatever of den'isov 's .
that was why p'etya had blushed and grown confused when den'isov asked him whether he could stay .
before they had ridden to the outskirts of the forest p'etya had considered he must carry out his instructions strictly and return at once .
it was already growing dusk when den'isov , p'etya , and the esaul rode up to the watchhouse .
in the passage of the small watchhouse a cossack with sleeves rolled up was chopping some mutton .
in the room three officers of den'isov 's band were converting a door into a tabletop .
p'etya took off his wet clothes , gave them to be dried , and at once began helping the officers to fix up the dinner table .
in ten minutes the table was ready and a napkin spread on it .
on the table were vodka , a flask of rum , white bread , roast mutton , and salt .
" so then what do you think , vas'ili dm'itrich ? " said he to den'isov .
" it 's all right my staying a day with you ? "
and not waiting for a reply he answered his own question : " you see i was told to find out
- well , i am finding out ....
only do let me into the very ... into the chief ...
i do n't want a reward ....
but i want ... "
p'etya clenched his teeth and looked around , throwing back his head and flourishing his arms .
" into the vewy chief ... " den'isov repeated with a smile .
" only , please let me command something , so that i may really command ... " p'etya went on .
" what would it be to you ? ...
oh , you want a knife ? "
he said , turning to an officer who wished to cut himself a piece of mutton .
and he handed him his clasp knife .
the officer admired it .
" please keep it .
i have several like it , " said p'etya , blushing . "
heavens !
i was quite forgetting ! "
he suddenly cried .
" i have some raisins , fine ones ; you know , seedless ones .
we have a new sutler and he has such capital things .
i bought ten pounds .
i am used to something sweet .
would you like some ? ... " and p'etya ran out into the passage to his cossack and brought back some bags which contained about five pounds of raisins . "
have some , gentlemen , have some ! "
" you want a coffeepot , do n't you ?
" he asked the esaul .
" i bought a capital one from our sutler !
he has splendid things .
and he 's very honest , that 's the chief thing .
i 'll be sure to send it to you .
or perhaps your flints are giving out , or are worn out - that happens sometimes , you know .
i have brought some with me , here they are "- and he showed a bag-"a hundred flints .
i bought them very cheap .
please take as many as you want , or all if you like .... "
then suddenly , dismayed lest he had said too much , p'etya stopped and blushed .
he tried to remember whether he had not done anything else that was foolish .
and running over the events of the day he remembered the french drummer boy .
" it 's capital for us here , but what of him ?
where have they put him ?
have they fed him ?
have n't they hurt his feelings ?
" he thought .
but having caught himself saying too much about the flints , he was now afraid to speak out .
" i might ask , " he thought , " but they 'll say : ' he 's a boy himself and so he pities the boy . '
i 'll show them tomorrow whether i 'm a boy .
will it seem odd if i ask ? "
p'etya thought .
" well , never mind ! " and immediately , blushing and looking anxiously at the officers to see if they appeared ironical , he said :
" may i call in that boy who was taken prisoner and give him something to eat ? ...
perhaps ... "
" yes , he 's a poor little fellow , " said den'isov , who evidently saw nothing shameful in this reminder .
" call him in .
his name is vincent bosse .
have him fetched . "
" i 'll call him , " said p'etya .
" yes , yes , call him .
a poor little fellow , " den'isov repeated .
p'etya was standing at the door when den'isov said this .
he slipped in between the officers , came close to den'isov , and said :
" let me kiss you , dear old fellow !
oh , how fine , how splendid ! "
and having kissed den'isov he ran out of the hut .
" bosse !
vincent ! "
p'etya cried , stopping outside the door .
" who do you want , sir ? " asked a voice in the darkness .
p'etya replied that he wanted the french lad who had been captured that day .
" ah , ves'enny ? " said a cossack .
vincent , the boy 's name , had already been changed by the cossacks into ves'enny ( vernal ) and into ves'enya by the peasants and soldiers .
in both these adaptations the reference to spring ( vesn'a ) matched the impression made by the young lad .
" he is warming himself there by the bonfire .
ho , ves'enya !
ves'enya!-ves'enny ! " laughing voices were heard calling to one another in the darkness .
" he 's a smart lad , " said an hussar standing near p'etya .
" we gave him something to eat a while ago .
he was awfully hungry ! "
the sound of bare feet splashing through the mud was heard in the darkness , and the drummer boy came to the door .
" ah , c'est vous ! " said p'etya .
" voulez - vous manger ?
n'ayez pas peur , on ne vous fera pas de mal , " * he added shyly and affectionately , touching the boy 's hand . "
entrez , entrez . "
* ( 2 )
* " ah , it 's you !
do you want something to eat ?
do n't be afraid , they wo n't hurt you . "
* ( 2 ) " come in , come in . "
" merci , monsieur , " * said the drummer boy in a trembling almost childish voice , and he began scraping his dirty feet on the threshold .
* " thank you , sir . "
there were many things p'etya wanted to say to the drummer boy , but did not dare to .
he stood irresolutely beside him in the passage .
then in the darkness he took the boy 's hand and pressed it .
" come in , come in ! "
he repeated in a gentle whisper . "
oh , what can i do for him ? "
he thought , and opening the door he let the boy pass in first .
when the boy had entered the hut , p'etya sat down at a distance from him , considering it beneath his dignity to pay attention to him .
but he fingered the money in his pocket and wondered whether it would seem ridiculous to give some to the drummer boy .
chapter viii
d'olokhov 's appearance amazed p'etya by its simplicity .
den'isov wore a cossack coat , had a beard , had an icon of nicholas the wonder - worker on his breast , and his way of speaking and everything he did indicated his unusual position .
but d'olokhov , who in moscow had worn a persian costume , had now the appearance of a most correct officer of the guards .
he was clean - shaven and wore a guardsman 's padded coat with an order of st. george at his buttonhole and a plain forage cap set straight on his head .
he took off his wet felt cloak in a corner of the room , and without greeting anyone went up to den'isov and began questioning him about the matter in hand .
den'isov told him of the designs the large detachments had on the transport , of the message p'etya had brought , and his own replies to both generals .
then he told him all he knew of the french detachment .
" that 's so .
but we must know what troops they are and their numbers , " said d'olokhov .
" it will be necessary to go there .
we ca n't start the affair without knowing for certain how many there are .
i like to work accurately .
here now - wouldn't one of these gentlemen like to ride over to the french camp with me ?
i have brought a spare uniform . "
" i , i ...
i 'll go with you ! "
cried p'etya .
" there 's no need for you to go at all , " said den'isov , addressing d'olokhov , " and as for him , i wo n't let him go on any account . "
" i like that ! " exclaimed p'etya .
" why should n't i go ? "
" because it 's useless . "
" well , you must excuse me , because ... because ... i shall go , and that 's all .
you 'll take me , wo n't you ?
" he said , turning to d'olokhov .
" why not ? " d'olokhov answered absently , scrutinizing the face of the french drummer boy . "
have you had that youngster with you long ?
" he asked den'isov .
" he was taken today but he knows nothing .
i 'm keeping him with me . "
" yes , and where do you put the others ? " inquired d'olokhov .
" where ? i send them away and take a weceipt for them , " shouted den'isov , suddenly flushing . "
and i say boldly that i have not a single man 's life on my conscience .
would it be difficult for you to send thirty or thwee hundwed men to town under escort , instead of staining - i speak bluntly - staining the honor of a soldier ? "
" that kind of amiable talk would be suitable from this young count of sixteen , " said d'olokhov with cold irony , " but it 's time for you to drop it . "
" why , i 've not said anything !
i only say that i 'll certainly go with you , " said p'etya shyly .
" but for you and me , old fellow , it 's time to drop these amenities , " continued d'olokhov , as if he found particular pleasure in speaking of this subject which irritated den'isov . "
now , why have you kept this lad ? "
he went on , swaying his head . "
because you are sorry for him !
do n't we know those ' receipts ' of yours ?
you send a hundred men away , and thirty get there .
the rest either starve or get killed .
so is n't it all the same not to send them ? "
the esaul , screwing up his light - colored eyes , nodded approvingly .
" that 's not the point .
i 'm not going to discuss the matter .
i do not wish to take it on my conscience .
you say they 'll die .
all wight .
only not by my fault ! "
d'olokhov began laughing .
" who has told them not to capture me these twenty times over ?
but if they did catch me they 'd string me up to an aspen tree , and with all your chivalry just the same . "
he paused . "
however , we must get to work .
tell the cossack to fetch my kit .
i have two french uniforms in it .
well , are you coming with me ?
" he asked p'etya .
" i ?
yes , yes , certainly ! "
cried p'etya , blushing almost to tears and glancing at den'isov .
while d'olokhov had been disputing with den'isov what should be done with prisoners , p'etya had once more felt awkward and restless ; but again he had no time to grasp fully what they were talking about .
" if grown - up , distinguished men think so , it must be necessary and right , " thought he . "
but above all den'isov must not dare to imagine that i 'll obey him and that he can order me about .
i will certainly go to the french camp with d'olokhov .
if he can , so can i ! "
and to all den'isov 's persuasions , p'etya replied that he too was accustomed to do everything accurately and not just anyhow , and that he never considered personal danger .
" for you 'll admit that if we do n't know for sure how many of them there are ... hundreds of lives may depend on it , while there are only two of us .
besides , i want to go very much and certainly will go , so do n't hinder me , " said he .
" it will only make things worse .... "
chapter ix
having put on french greatcoats and shakos , p'etya and d'olokhov rode to the clearing from which den'isov had reconnoitered the french camp , and emerging from the forest in pitch darkness they descended into the hollow .
on reaching the bottom , d'olokhov told the cossacks accompanying him to await him there and rode on at a quick trot along the road to the bridge .
p'etya , his heart in his mouth with excitement , rode by his side .
" if we 're caught , i wo n't be taken alive !
i have a pistol , " whispered he .
" do n't talk russian , " said d'olokhov in a hurried whisper , and at that very moment they heard through the darkness the challenge : " qui vive ?
"
* and the click of a musket .
* " who goes there ? "
the blood rushed to p'etya 's face and he grasped his pistol .
" lanciers du 6-me , " * replied d'olokhov , neither hastening nor slackening his horse 's pace .
* " lancers of the 6th regiment . "
the black figure of a sentinel stood on the bridge .
" mot d'ordre . " *
* " password . "
d'olokhov reined in his horse and advanced at a walk .
" dites donc , le colonel g'erard est ici ? "
* he asked .
* " tell me , is colonel g'erard here ? "
" mot d'ordre , " repeated the sentinel , barring the way and not replying .
" quand un officier fait sa ronde , les sentinelles ne demandent pas le mot d'ordre ... " cried d'olokhov suddenly flaring up and riding straight at the sentinel . "
je vous demande si le colonel est ici . "
*
* " when an officer is making his round , sentinels do n't ask him for the password ....
i am asking you if the colonel is here . "
and without waiting for an answer from the sentinel , who had stepped aside , d'olokhov rode up the incline at a walk .
noticing the black outline of a man crossing the road , d'olokhov stopped him and inquired where the commander and officers were .
having ridden up the road , on both sides of which french talk could be heard around the campfires , d'olokhov turned into the courtyard of the landowner 's house .
having ridden in , he dismounted and approached a big blazing campfire , around which sat several men talking noisily .
" oh , he 's a hard nut to crack , " said one of the officers who was sitting in the shadow at the other side of the fire .
" he 'll make them get a move on , those fellows ! " said another , laughing .
both fell silent , peering out through the darkness at the sound of d'olokhov 's and p'etya 's steps as they advanced to the fire leading their horses .
" bonjour , messieurs ! "
* said d'olokhov loudly and clearly .
* " good day , gentlemen . "
there was a stir among the officers in the shadow beyond the fire , and one tall , long - necked officer , walking round the fire , came up to d'olokhov .
" is that you , cl'ement ? " he asked .
"
where the devil ... ?
" but , noticing his mistake , he broke off short and , with a frown , greeted d'olokhov as a stranger , asking what he could do for him .
d'olokhov said that he and his companion were trying to overtake their regiment , and addressing the company in general asked whether they knew anything of the 6th regiment .
none of them knew anything , and p'etya thought the officers were beginning to look at him and d'olokhov with hostility and suspicion .
for some seconds all were silent .
" if you were counting on the evening soup , you have come too late , " said a voice from behind the fire with a repressed laugh .
d'olokhov replied that they were not hungry and must push on farther that night .
he handed the horses over to the soldier who was stirring the pot and squatted down on his heels by the fire beside the officer with the long neck .
that officer did not take his eyes from d'olokhov and again asked to what regiment he belonged .
" those brigands are everywhere , " replied an officer from behind the fire .
d'olokhov remarked that the cossacks were a danger only to stragglers such as his companion and himself , " but probably they would not dare to attack large detachments ?
" he added inquiringly .
no one replied .
" well , now he 'll come away , " p'etya thought every moment as he stood by the campfire listening to the talk .
but d'olokhov restarted the conversation which had dropped and began putting direct questions as to how many men there were in the battalion , how many battalions , and how many prisoners .
asking about the russian prisoners with that detachment , d'olokhov said :
" a horrid business dragging these corpses about with one !
it would be better to shoot such rabble , " and burst into loud laughter , so strange that p'etya thought the french would immediately detect their disguise , and involuntarily took a step back from the campfire .
no one replied a word to d'olokhov 's laughter , and a french officer whom they could not see ( he lay wrapped in a greatcoat ) rose and whispered something to a companion .
d'olokhov got up and called to the soldier who was holding their horses .
" will they bring our horses or not ? " thought p'etya , instinctively drawing nearer to d'olokhov .
the horses were brought .
" good evening , gentlemen , " said d'olokhov .
p'etya wished to say " good night " but could not utter a word .
the officers were whispering together .
d'olokhov was a long time mounting his horse which would not stand still , then he rode out of the yard at a footpace .
p'etya rode beside him , longing to look round to see whether or not the french were running after them , but not daring to .
coming out onto the road d'olokhov did not ride back across the open country , but through the village .
at one spot he stopped and listened . "
do you hear ?
" he asked .
p'etya recognized the sound of russian voices and saw the dark figures of russian prisoners round their campfires .
when they had descended to the bridge p'etya and d'olokhov rode past the sentinel , who without saying a word paced morosely up and down it , then they descended into the hollow where the cossacks awaited them .
" well now , good - by .
tell den'isov , ' at the first shot at daybreak , ' " said d'olokhov and was about to ride away , but p'etya seized hold of him .
" really ! " he cried , " you are such a hero !
oh , how fine , how splendid !
how i love you ! "
" all right , all right ! "
said d'olokhov .
but p'etya did not let go of him and d'olokhov saw through the gloom that p'etya was bending toward him and wanted to kiss him .
d'olokhov kissed him , laughed , turned his horse , and vanished into the darkness .
chapter x
having returned to the watchman 's hut , p'etya found den'isov in the passage .
he was awaiting p'etya 's return in a state of agitation , anxiety , and self - reproach for having let him go .
" thank god ! "
he exclaimed . "
yes , thank god ! "
he repeated , listening to p'etya 's rapturous account . "
but , devil take you , i have n't slept because of you !
well , thank god .
now lie down .
we can still get a nap before morning . "
" but ... no , " said p'etya , " i do n't want to sleep yet .
besides i know myself , if i fall asleep it 's finished .
and then i am used to not sleeping before a battle . "
he sat awhile in the hut joyfully recalling the details of his expedition and vividly picturing to himself what would happen next day .
then , noticing that den'isov was asleep , he rose and went out of doors .
it was still quite dark outside .
the rain was over , but drops were still falling from the trees .
near the watchman 's hut the black shapes of the cossacks ' shanties and of horses tethered together could be seen .
behind the hut the dark shapes of the two wagons with their horses beside them were discernible , and in the hollow the dying campfire gleamed red .
not all the cossacks and hussars were asleep ; here and there , amid the sounds of falling drops and the munching of the horses near by , could be heard low voices which seemed to be whispering .
p'etya came out , peered into the darkness , and went up to the wagons .
someone was snoring under them , and around them stood saddled horses munching their oats .
in the dark p'etya recognized his own horse , which he called " karab'akh " though it was of ukranian breed , and went up to it .
" well , karab'akh !
we 'll do some service tomorrow , " said he , sniffing its nostrils and kissing it .
" why are n't you asleep , sir ? " said a cossack who was sitting under a wagon .
" no , ah ...
likhach"ev - isn't
that your name ?
do you know i have only just come back !
we 've been into the french camp . "
and p'etya gave the cossack a detailed account not only of his ride but also of his object , and why he considered it better to risk his life than to act " just anyhow . "
" well , you should get some sleep now , " said the cossack .
" no , i am used to this , " said p'etya .
" i say , are n't the flints in your pistols worn out ?
i brought some with me .
do n't you want any ?
you can have some . "
the cossack bent forward from under the wagon to get a closer look at p'etya .
" because i am accustomed to doing everything accurately , " said p'etya .
" some fellows do things just anyhow , without preparation , and then they 're sorry for it afterwards .
i do n't like that . "
" just so , " said the cossack .
" oh yes , another thing !
please , my dear fellow , will you sharpen my saber for me ?
it 's got bl ... "
( p'etya feared to tell a lie , and the saber never had been sharpened . )
" can you do it ? "
" of course i can . "
likhach"ev got up , rummaged in his pack , and soon p'etya heard the warlike sound of steel on whetstone .
he climbed onto the wagon and sat on its edge .
the cossack was sharpening the saber under the wagon .
" i say !
are the lads asleep ? " asked p'etya .
" some are , and some aren't - like us . "
" well , and that boy ? "
" ves'enny ?
oh , he 's thrown himself down there in the passage .
fast asleep after his fright .
he was that glad ! "
after that p'etya remained silent for a long time , listening to the sounds .
he heard footsteps in the darkness and a black figure appeared .
" what are you sharpening ? " asked a man coming up to the wagon .
" why , this gentleman 's saber . "
" that 's right , " said the man , whom p'etya took to be an hussar .
" was the cup left here ? "
" there , by the wheel ! "
the hussar took the cup .
" it must be daylight soon , " said he , yawning , and went away .
he was in a fairy kingdom where nothing resembled reality .
the big dark blotch might really be the watchman 's hut or it might be a cavern leading to the very depths of the earth .
perhaps the red spot was a fire , or it might be the eye of an enormous monster .
it might really have been that the hussar came for water and went back into the hollow , but perhaps he had simply vanished - disappeared altogether and dissolved into nothingness .
nothing p'etya could have seen now would have surprised him .
he was in a fairy kingdom where everything was possible .
he looked up at the sky .
and the sky was a fairy realm like the earth .
it was clearing , and over the tops of the trees clouds were swiftly sailing as if unveiling the stars .
sometimes it looked as if the clouds were passing , and a clear black sky appeared .
sometimes it seemed as if the black spaces were clouds .
sometimes the sky seemed to be rising high , high overhead , and then it seemed to sink so low that one could touch it with one 's hand .
p'etya 's eyes began to close and he swayed a little .
the trees were dripping .
quiet talking was heard .
the horses neighed and jostled one another .
someone snored .
" ozheg - zheg , ozheg - zheg ... " hissed the saber against the whetstone , and suddenly p'etya heard an harmonious orchestra playing some unknown , sweetly solemn hymn .
p'etya was as musical as nat'asha and more so than nicholas , but had never learned music or thought about it , and so the melody that unexpectedly came to his mind seemed to him particularly fresh and attractive .
the music became more and more audible .
the melody grew and passed from one instrument to another .
and what was played was a fugue - though p'etya had not the least conception of what a fugue is .
" oh - why , that was in a dream ! "
p'etya said to himself , as he lurched forward .
" it 's in my ears .
but perhaps it 's music of my own .
well , go on , my music !
now ! ... "
he closed his eyes , and , from all sides as if from a distance , sounds fluttered , grew into harmonies , separated , blended , and again all mingled into the same sweet and solemn hymn . "
oh , this is delightful !
as much as i like and as i like ! " said p'etya to himself .
he tried to conduct that enormous orchestra .
" now softly , softly die away ! " and the sounds obeyed him . "
now fuller , more joyful .
still more and more joyful ! "
and from an unknown depth rose increasingly triumphant sounds .
" now voices join in ! " ordered p'etya .
and at first from afar he heard men 's voices and
then women 's .
the voices grew in harmonious triumphant strength , and p'etya listened to their surpassing beauty in awe and joy .
p'etya did not know how long this lasted : he enjoyed himself all the time , wondered at his enjoyment and regretted that there was no one to share it .
he was awakened by likhach"ev 's kindly voice .
" it 's ready , your honor ; you can split a frenchman in half with it ! "
p'etya woke up .
" it 's getting light , it 's really getting light ! " he exclaimed .
the horses that had previously been invisible could now be seen to their very tails , and a watery light showed itself through the bare branches .
p'etya shook himself , jumped up , took a ruble from his pocket and gave it to likhach"ev ; then he flourished the saber , tested it , and sheathed it .
the cossacks were untying their horses and tightening their saddle girths .
" and here 's the commander , " said likhach"ev .
den'isov came out of the watchman 's hut and , having called p'etya , gave orders to get ready .
chapter xi
the men rapidly picked out their horses in the semidarkness , tightened their saddle girths , and formed companies .
den'isov stood by the watchman 's hut giving final orders .
the infantry of the detachment passed along the road and quickly disappeared amid the trees in the mist of early dawn , hundreds of feet splashing through the mud .
the esaul gave some orders to his men .
p'etya held his horse by the bridle , impatiently awaiting the order to mount .
his face , having been bathed in cold water , was all aglow , and his eyes were particularly brilliant .
cold shivers ran down his spine and his whole body pulsed rhythmically .
" well , is ev'wything weady ? " asked den'isov . "
bwing the horses . "
the horses were brought .
den'isov was angry with the cossack because the saddle girths were too slack , reproved him , and mounted .
p'etya put his foot in the stirrup .
" vas'ili dm'itrich , entrust me with some commission !
please ... for god 's sake ... ! " said he .
den'isov seemed to have forgotten p'etya 's very existence .
he turned to glance at him .
" i ask one thing of you , " he said sternly , " to obey me and not shove yourself forward anywhere . "
he did not say another word to p'etya but rode in silence all the way .
when they had come to the edge of the forest it was noticeably growing light over the field .
den'isov talked in whispers with the esaul and the cossacks rode past p'etya and den'isov .
when they had all ridden by , den'isov touched his horse and rode down the hill .
slipping onto their haunches and sliding , the horses descended with their riders into the ravine .
p'etya rode beside den'isov , the pulsation of his body constantly increasing .
it was getting lighter and lighter , but the mist still hid distant objects .
having reached the valley , den'isov looked back and nodded to a cossack beside him .
" the signal ! " said he .
the cossack raised his arm and a shot rang out .
in an instant the tramp of horses galloping forward was heard , shouts came from various sides , and then more shots .
at the first sound of trampling hoofs and shouting , p'etya lashed his horse and loosening his rein galloped forward , not heeding den'isov who shouted at him .
it seemed to p'etya that at the moment the shot was fired it suddenly became as bright as noon .
he galloped to the bridge .
cossacks were galloping along the road in front of him .
on the bridge he collided with a cossack who had fallen behind , but he galloped on .
in front of him soldiers , probably frenchmen , were running from right to left across the road .
one of them fell in the mud under his horse 's feet .
cossacks were crowding about a hut , busy with something .
from the midst of that crowd terrible screams arose .
p'etya galloped up , and the first thing he saw was the pale face and trembling jaw of a frenchman , clutching the handle of a lance that had been aimed at him .
" hurrah ! ...
lads ! ...
ours ! " shouted p'etya , and giving rein to his excited horse he galloped forward along the village street .
he could hear shooting ahead of him .
cossacks , hussars , and ragged russian prisoners , who had come running from both sides of the road , were shouting something loudly and incoherently .
a gallant - looking frenchman , in a blue overcoat , capless , and with a frowning red face , had been defending himself against the hussars .
when p'etya galloped up the frenchman had already fallen . "
too late again ! " flashed through p'etya 's mind and he galloped on to the place from which the rapid firing could be heard .
the shots came from the yard of the landowner 's house he had visited the night before with d'olokhov .
the french were making a stand there behind a wattle fence in a garden thickly overgrown with bushes and were firing at the cossacks who crowded at the gateway .
through the smoke , as he approached the gate , p'etya saw d'olokhov , whose face was of a pale - greenish tint , shouting to his men . "
go round !
wait for the infantry !
" he exclaimed as p'etya rode up to him .
" wait ? ...
hurrah - ah - ah ! " shouted p'etya , and without pausing a moment galloped to the place whence came the sounds of firing and where the smoke was thickest .
a volley was heard , and some bullets whistled past , while others plashed against something .
the cossacks and d'olokhov galloped after p'etya into the gateway of the courtyard .
in the dense wavering smoke some of the french threw down their arms and ran out of the bushes to meet the cossacks , while others ran down the hill toward the pond .
p'etya was galloping along the courtyard , but instead of holding the reins he waved both his arms about rapidly and strangely , slipping farther and farther to one side in his saddle .
his horse , having galloped up to a campfire that was smoldering in the morning light , stopped suddenly , and p'etya fell heavily on to the wet ground .
the cossacks saw that his arms and legs jerked rapidly though his head was quite motionless .
a bullet had pierced his skull .
" done for ! " he said with a frown , and went to the gate to meet den'isov who was riding toward him .
" killed ? "
cried den'isov , recognizing from a distance the unmistakably lifeless attitude - very familiar to him - in which p'etya 's body was lying .
" done for ! " repeated d'olokhov as if the utterance of these words afforded him pleasure , and he went quickly up to the prisoners , who were surrounded by cossacks who had hurried up .
" we wo n't take them ! "
he called out to den'isov .
den'isov did not reply ; he rode up to p'etya , dismounted , and with trembling hands turned toward himself the bloodstained , mud - bespattered face which had already gone white .
" i am used to something sweet .
raisins , fine ones ... take them all ! "
he recalled p'etya 's words .
and the cossacks looked round in surprise at the sound , like the yelp of a dog , with which den'isov turned away , walked to the wattle fence , and seized hold of it .
among the russian prisoners rescued by den'isov and d'olokhov was pierre bez'ukhov .
chapter xii
during the whole of their march from moscow no fresh orders had been issued by the french authorities concerning the party of prisoners among whom was pierre .
on the twenty - second of october that party was no longer with the same troops and baggage trains with which it had left moscow .
half the wagons laden with hardtack that had traveled the first stages with them had been captured by cossacks , the other half had gone on ahead .
not one of those dismounted cavalrymen who had marched in front of the prisoners was left ; they had all disappeared .
the artillery the prisoners had seen in front of them during the first days was now replaced by marshal junot 's enormous baggage train , convoyed by westphalians .
behind the prisoners came a cavalry baggage train .
from vy'azma onwards the french army , which had till then moved in three columns , went on as a single group .
the symptoms of disorder that pierre had noticed at their first halting place after leaving moscow had now reached the utmost limit .
the road along which they moved was bordered on both sides by dead horses ; ragged men who had fallen behind from various regiments continually changed about , now joining the moving column , now again lagging behind it .
these three groups traveling together - the cavalry stores , the convoy of prisoners , and junot 's baggage train - still constituted a separate and united whole , though each of the groups was rapidly melting away .
of the artillery baggage train which had consisted of a hundred and twenty wagons , not more than sixty now remained ; the rest had been captured or left behind .
some of junot 's wagons also had been captured or abandoned .
three wagons had been raided and robbed by stragglers from davout 's corps .
the group of prisoners had melted away most of all .
of the three hundred and thirty men who had set out from moscow fewer than a hundred now remained .
the prisoners were more burdensome to the escort than even the cavalry saddles or junot 's baggage .
the arrangement adopted when they started , that the officer prisoners should be kept separate from the rest , had long since been abandoned .
all who could walk went together , and after the third stage pierre had rejoined karat'aev and the gray - blue bandy - legged dog that had chosen karat'aev for its master .
on the third day after leaving moscow karat'aev again fell ill with the fever he had suffered from in the hospital in moscow , and as he grew gradually weaker pierre kept away from him .
pierre did not know why , but since karat'aev had begun to grow weaker it had cost him an effort to go near him .
and now during these last three weeks of the march he had learned still another new , consolatory truth - that nothing in this world is terrible .
he had learned that as there is no condition in which man can be happy and entirely free , so there is no condition in which he need be unhappy and lack freedom .
of all that he himself subsequently termed his sufferings , but which at the time he scarcely felt , the worst was the state of his bare , raw , and scab - covered feet .
the one thing that was at first hard to bear was his feet .
however , he did not look at them now , but thought of other things .
he did not see and did not hear how they shot the prisoners who lagged behind , though more than a hundred perished in that way .
he did not think of karat'aev who grew weaker every day and evidently would soon have to share that fate .
still less did pierre think about himself .
the harder his position became and the more terrible the future , the more independent of that position in which he found himself were the joyful and comforting thoughts , memories , and imaginings that came to him .
chapter xiii
at midday on the twenty - second of october pierre was going uphill along the muddy , slippery road , looking at his feet and at the roughness of the way .
occasionally he glanced at the familiar crowd around him and then again at his feet .
the former and the latter were alike familiar and his own .
the dog was merrier and sleeker than it had been in moscow .
all around lay the flesh of different animals - from men to horses - in various stages of decomposition ; and as the wolves were kept off by the passing men the dog could eat all it wanted .
it had been raining since morning and had seemed as if at any moment it might cease and the sky clear , but after a short break it began raining harder than before .
the saturated road no longer absorbed the water , which ran along the ruts in streams .
pierre walked along , looking from side to side , counting his steps in threes , and reckoning them off on his fingers .
mentally addressing the rain , he repeated : " now then , now then , go on !
pelt harder ! "
it seemed to him that he was thinking of nothing , but far down and deep within him his soul was occupied with something important and comforting .
this something was a most subtle spiritual deduction from a conversation with karat'aev the day before .
at their yesterday 's halting place , feeling chilly by a dying campfire , pierre had got up and gone to the next one , which was burning better .
there plat'on karat'aev was sitting covered up - head and all - with his greatcoat as if it were a vestment , telling the soldiers in his effective and pleasant though now feeble voice a story pierre knew .
it was already past midnight , the hour when karat'aev was usually free of his fever and particularly lively .
when pierre reached the fire and heard plat'on 's voice enfeebled by illness , and saw his pathetic face brightly lit up by the blaze , he felt a painful prick at his heart .
his feeling of pity for this man frightened him and he wished to go away , but there was no other fire , and pierre sat down , trying not to look at plat'on .
" well , how are you ? " he asked .
" how am i ?
if we grumble at sickness , god wo n't grant us death , " replied plat'on , and at once resumed the story he had begun .
" and so , brother , " he continued , with a smile on his pale emaciated face and a particularly happy light in his eyes , " you see , brother ... "
pierre had long been familiar with that story .
karat'aev had told it to him alone some half - dozen times and always with a specially joyful emotion .
but well as he knew it , pierre now listened to that tale as to something new , and the quiet rapture karat'aev evidently felt as he told it communicated itself also to pierre .
the story was of an old merchant who lived a good and god - fearing life with his family , and who went once to the n'izhni fair with a companion - a rich merchant .
having put up at an inn they both went to sleep , and next morning his companion was found robbed and with his throat cut .
a bloodstained knife was found under the old merchant 's pillow .
he was tried , knouted , and his nostrils having been torn off , " all in due form " as karat'aev put it , he was sent to hard labor in siberia .
" and so , brother " ( it was at this point that pierre came up ) , " ten years or more passed by .
the old man was living as a convict , submitting as he should and doing no wrong .
only he prayed to god for death .
well , one night the convicts were gathered just as we are , with the old man among them .
and they began telling what each was suffering for , and how they had sinned against god .
one told how he had taken a life , another had taken two , a third had set a house on fire , while another had simply been a vagrant and had done nothing .
so they asked the old man : ' what are you being punished for , daddy?'-'i , my dear brothers , ' said he , ' am being punished for my own and other men 's sins .
but i have not killed anyone or taken anything that was not mine , but have only helped my poorer brothers .
i was a merchant , my dear brothers , and had much property . '
and he went on to tell them all about it in due order . '
i do n't grieve for myself , ' he says , ' god , it seems , has chastened me .
only i am sorry for my old wife and the children , ' and the old man began to weep .
now it happened that in the group was the very man who had killed the other merchant . '
where did it happen , daddy ? '
he said . '
when , and in what month ? '
he asked all about it and his heart began to ache .
so he comes up to the old man like this , and falls down at his feet ! '
you are perishing because of me , daddy , ' he says .
' it 's quite true , lads , that this man , ' he says , ' is being tortured innocently and for nothing !
i , ' he says , ' did that deed , and i put the knife under your head while you were asleep .
forgive me , daddy , ' he says , ' for christ 's sake ! ' "
karat'aev paused , smiling joyously as he gazed into the fire , and he drew the logs together .
" and the old man said , ' god will forgive you , we are all sinners in his sight .
i suffer for my own sins , ' and he wept bitter tears .
well , and what do you think , dear friends ? "
that murderer confessed to the authorities . '
i have taken six lives , ' he says ( he was a great sinner ) , ' but what i am most sorry for is this old man .
do n't let him suffer because of me . '
so he confessed and it was all written down and the papers sent off in due form .
the place was a long way off , and while they were judging , what with one thing and another , filling in the papers all in due form - the authorities i mean - time passed .
the affair reached the tsar .
after a while the tsar 's decree came : to set the merchant free and give him a compensation that had been awarded .
the paper arrived and they began to look for the old man . '
where is the old man who has been suffering innocently and in vain ?
a paper has come from the tsar ! '
so they began looking for him , " here karat'aev 's lower jaw trembled , " but god had already forgiven him - he was dead !
that 's how it was , dear fellows ! "
karat'aev concluded and sat for a long time silent , gazing before him with a smile .
chapter xiv
" ` a vos places ! "
* suddenly cried a voice .
* " to your places . "
a pleasant feeling of excitement and an expectation of something joyful and solemn was aroused among the soldiers of the convoy and the prisoners .
from all sides came shouts of command , and from the left came smartly dressed cavalrymen on good horses , passing the prisoners at a trot .
the expression on all faces showed the tension people feel at the approach of those in authority .
the prisoners thronged together and were pushed off the road .
the convoy formed up .
" the emperor !
the emperor !
the marshal !
the duke ! " and hardly had the sleek cavalry passed , before a carriage drawn by six gray horses rattled by .
pierre caught a glimpse of a man in a three - cornered hat with a tranquil look on his handsome , plump , white face .
it was one of the marshals .
his eye fell on pierre 's large and striking figure , and in the expression with which he frowned and looked away pierre thought he detected sympathy and a desire to conceal that sympathy .
the general in charge of the stores galloped after the carriage with a red and frightened face , whipping up his skinny horse .
several officers formed a group and some soldiers crowded round them .
their faces all looked excited and worried .
" what did he say ?
what did he say ?
" pierre heard them ask .
while the marshal was passing , the prisoners had huddled together in a crowd , and pierre saw karat'aev whom he had not yet seen that morning .
he sat in his short overcoat leaning against a birch tree .
on his face , besides the look of joyful emotion it had worn yesterday while telling the tale of the merchant who suffered innocently , there was now an expression of quiet solemnity .
karat'aev looked at pierre with his kindly round eyes now filled with tears , evidently wishing him to come near that he might say something to him .
but pierre was not sufficiently sure of himself .
he made as if he did not notice that look and moved hastily away .
when the prisoners again went forward pierre looked round .
karat'aev was still sitting at the side of the road under the birch tree and two frenchmen were talking over his head .
pierre did not look round again but went limping up the hill .
from behind , where karat'aev had been sitting , came the sound of a shot .
pierre heard it plainly , but at that moment he remembered that he had not yet finished reckoning up how many stages still remained to smol'ensk - a calculation he had begun before the marshal went by .
and he again started reckoning .
two french soldiers ran past pierre , one of whom carried a lowered and smoking gun .
they both looked pale , and in the expression on their faces - one of them glanced timidly at pierre - there was something resembling what he had seen on the face of the young soldier at the execution .
pierre looked at the soldier and remembered that , two days before , that man had burned his shirt while drying it at the fire and how they had laughed at him .
behind him , where karat'aev had been sitting , the dog began to howl .
" what a stupid beast !
why is it howling ? " thought pierre .
chapter xv
the stores , the prisoners , and the marshal 's baggage train stopped at the village of sh'amshevo .
the men crowded together round the campfires .
pierre went up to the fire , ate some roast horseflesh , lay down with his back to the fire , and immediately fell asleep .
he again slept as he had done at mozh'aysk after the battle of borodin'o .
again real events mingled with dreams and again someone , he or another , gave expression to his thoughts , and even to the same thoughts that had been expressed in his dream at mozh'aysk .
" life is everything .
life is god .
everything changes and moves and that movement is god .
and while there is life there is joy in consciousness of the divine .
to love life is to love god .
harder and more blessed than all else is to love this life in one 's sufferings , in innocent sufferings . "
" karat'aev ! " came to pierre 's mind .
and suddenly he saw vividly before him a long - forgotten , kindly old man who had given him geography lessons in switzerland . "
wait a bit , " said the old man , and showed pierre a globe .
this globe was alive - a vibrating ball without fixed dimensions .
its whole surface consisted of drops closely pressed together , and all these drops moved and changed places , sometimes several of them merging into one , sometimes one dividing into many .
each drop tried to spread out and occupy as much space as possible , but others striving to do the same compressed it , sometimes destroyed it , and sometimes merged with it .
" that is life , " said the old teacher .
" how simple and clear it is , " thought pierre .
" how is it i did not know it before ? "
" god is in the midst , and each drop tries to expand so as to reflect him to the greatest extent .
and it grows , merges , disappears from the surface , sinks to the depths , and again emerges .
there now , karat'aev has spread out and disappeared .
do you understand , my child ? " said the teacher .
" do you understand , damn you ? " shouted a voice , and pierre woke up .
he lifted himself and sat up .
a frenchman who had just pushed a russian soldier away was squatting by the fire , engaged in roasting a piece of meat stuck on a ramrod .
his sleeves were rolled up and his sinewy , hairy , red hands with their short fingers deftly turned the ramrod .
his brown morose face with frowning brows was clearly visible by the glow of the charcoal .
" it 's all the same to him , " he muttered , turning quickly to a soldier who stood behind him . "
brigand !
get away ! "
and twisting the ramrod he looked gloomily at pierre , who turned away and gazed into the darkness .
a prisoner , the russian soldier the frenchman had pushed away , was sitting near the fire patting something with his hand .
looking more closely pierre recognized the blue - gray dog , sitting beside the soldier , wagging its tail .
" ah , he 's come ? " said pierre . "
and plat- "
he began , but did not finish .
before sunrise he was awakened by shouts and loud and rapid firing .
french soldiers were running past him .
" the cossacks ! "
one of them shouted , and a moment later a crowd of russians surrounded pierre .
for a long time he could not understand what was happening to him .
all around he heard his comrades sobbing with joy .
" brothers !
dear fellows !
darlings ! "
old soldiers exclaimed , weeping , as they embraced cossacks and hussars .
the hussars and cossacks crowded round the prisoners ; one offered them clothes , another boots , and a third bread .
pierre sobbed as he sat among them and could not utter a word .
he hugged the first soldier who approached him , and kissed him , weeping .
d'olokhov stood at the gate of the ruined house , letting a crowd of disarmed frenchmen pass by .
on the opposite side stood d'olokhov 's cossack , counting the prisoners and marking off each hundred with a chalk line on the gate .
" how many ? "
d'olokhov asked the cossack .
" the second hundred , " replied the cossack .
" filez , filez ! "
* d'olokhov kept saying , having adopted this expression from the french , and when his eyes met those of the prisoners they flashed with a cruel light .
* " get along , get along ! "
den'isov , bareheaded and with a gloomy face , walked behind some cossacks who were carrying the body of p'etya rost'ov to a hole that had been dug in the garden .
chapter xvi
from this beginning the succeeding terms of the progression could be determined mathematically .
beyond vy'azma the french army instead of moving in three columns huddled together into one mass , and so went on to the end .
berthier wrote to his emperor ( we know how far commanding officers allow themselves to diverge from the truth in describing the condition of an army ) and this is what he said :
i deem it my duty to report to your majesty the condition of the various corps i have had occasion to observe during different stages of the last two or three days ' march .
they are almost disbanded .
scarcely a quarter of the soldiers remain with the standards of their regiments , the others go off by themselves in different directions hoping to find food and escape discipline .
in general they regard smol'ensk as the place where they hope to recover .
during the last few days many of the men have been seen to throw away their cartridges and their arms .
the soldiers , who are worn out with hunger and fatigue , need these supplies as well as a few days ' rest .
many have died these last days on the road or at the bivouacs .
this state of things is continually becoming worse and makes one fear that unless a prompt remedy is applied the troops will no longer be under control in case of an engagement .
november 9 : twenty miles from smol'ensk .
after staggering into smol'ensk which seemed to them a promised land , the french , searching for food , killed one another , sacked their own stores , and when everything had been plundered fled farther .
they all went without knowing whither or why they were going .
still less did that genius , napoleon , know it , for no one issued any orders to him .
and though they pretended to be concerned about the army , each was thinking only of himself and of how to get away quickly and save himself .
chapter xvii
first he rings his bell fearlessly , but when he gets into a tight place he runs away as quietly as he can , and often thinking to escape runs straight into his opponent 's arms .
owing to the rapidity of the french flight and the russian pursuit and the consequent exhaustion of the horses , the chief means of approximately ascertaining the enemy 's position - by cavalry scouting - was not available .
besides , as a result of the frequent and rapid change of position by each army , even what information was obtained could not be delivered in time .
one army fled and the other pursued .
expecting the enemy from behind and not in front , the french separated in their flight and spread out over a distance of twenty - four hours .
in front of them all fled the emperor , then the kings , then the dukes .
and here as in a game of blindman 's buff the french ran into our vanguard .
seeing their enemy unexpectedly the french fell into confusion and stopped short from the sudden fright , but then they resumed their flight , abandoning their comrades who were farther behind .
they abandoned one another , abandoned all their heavy baggage , their artillery , and half their men , and fled , getting past the russians by night by making semicircles to the right .
from orsh'a they fled farther along the road to v'ilna , still playing at blindman 's buff with the pursuing army .
at the ber"ezina they again became disorganized , many were drowned and many surrendered , but those who got across the river fled farther .
their supreme chief donned a fur coat and , having seated himself in a sleigh , galloped on alone , abandoning his companions .
the others who could do so drove away too , leaving those who could not to surrender or die .
chapter xviii
this campaign consisted in a flight of the french during which they did all they could to destroy themselves .
from the time they turned onto the kal'uga road to the day their leader fled from the army , none of the movements of the crowd had any sense .
but no !
similarly profound considerations are given for his retreat from smol'ensk to orsh'a .
then his heroism at kr'asnoe is described , where he is reported to have been prepared to accept battle and take personal command , and to have walked about with a birch stick and said :
" j'ai assez fait l'empereur ; il est temps de faire le g'en'eral , " * but nevertheless immediately ran away again , abandoning to its fate the scattered fragments of the army he left behind .
* " i have acted the emperor long enough ; it is time to act the general . "
and lastly , the final departure of the great emperor from his heroic army is presented to us by the historians as something great and characteristic of genius .
even that final running away , described in ordinary language as the lowest depth of baseness which every child is taught to be ashamed of - even that act finds justification in the historians ' language .
" greatness , " it seems , excludes the standards of right and wrong .
for the " great " man nothing is wrong , there is no atrocity for which a " great " man can be blamed .
" c'est grand ! "
* say the historians , and there no longer exists either good or evil but only " grand " and " not grand . "
grand is good , not grand is bad .
grand is the characteristic , in their conception , of some special animals called " heroes . "
* " it is great . "
* ( 2 ) that it is great .
" du sublime ( he saw something sublime in himself ) au ridicule il n'y a qu'un pas , " * said he .
and the whole world for fifty years has been repeating : " sublime !
grand !
napol'eon le grand ! "
du sublime au ridicule il n'y a qu'un pas .
* " from the sublime to the ridiculous is but a step . "
and it occurs to no one that to admit a greatness not commensurable with the standard of right and wrong is merely to admit one 's own nothingness and immeasurable meanness .
for us with the standard of good and evil given us by christ , no human actions are incommensurable .
and there is no greatness where simplicity , goodness , and truth are absent .
chapter xix
what russian , reading the account of the last part of the campaign of 1812 , has not experienced an uncomfortable feeling of regret , dissatisfaction , and perplexity ?
can the french be so enormously superior to us that when we had surrounded them with superior forces we could not beat them ?
how could that happen ?
history ( or what is called by that name ) replying to these questions says that this occurred because kut'uzov and torm'asov and chichag'ov , and this man and that man , did not execute such and such maneuvers ....
but why did they not execute those maneuvers ?
and why if they were guilty of not carrying out a prearranged plan were they not tried and punished ?
why was the russian army - which with inferior forces had withstood the enemy in full strength at borodin'o - defeated at kr'asnoe and the ber"ezina by the disorganized crowds of the french when it was numerically superior ?
there never was or could have been such an aim , for it would have been senseless and its attainment quite impossible .
it would have been senseless , first because napoleon 's disorganized army was flying from russia with all possible speed , that is to say , was doing just what every russian desired .
so what was the use of performing various operations on the french who were running away as fast as they possibly could ?
secondly , it would have been senseless to block the passage of men whose whole energy was directed to flight .
the only thing to be said in excuse of that gardener would be that he was very angry .
but not even that could be said for those who drew up this project , for it was not they who had suffered from the trampled beds .
but besides the fact that cutting off napoleon with his army would have been senseless , it was impossible .
secondly it was impossible , because to paralyze the momentum with which napoleon 's army was retiring , incomparably greater forces than the russians possessed would have been required .
thirdly it was impossible , because the military term " to cut off " has no meaning .
one can cut off a slice of bread , but not an army .
it is only possible to capture prisoners if they agree to be captured , just as it is only possible to catch a swallow if it settles on one 's hand .
men can only be taken prisoners if they surrender according to the rules of strategy and tactics , as the germans did .
but the french troops quite rightly did not consider that this suited them , since death by hunger and cold awaited them in flight or captivity alike .
during the movement of the russian army from tar'utino to kr'asnoe it lost fifty thousand sick or stragglers , that is a number equal to the population of a large provincial town .
half the men fell out of the army without a battle .
the aim of cutting off napoleon and his army never existed except in the imaginations of a dozen people .
it could not exist because it was senseless and unattainable .
the people had a single aim : to free their land from invasion .
that aim was attained in the first place of itself , as the french ran away , and so it was only necessary not to stop their flight .
secondly it was attained by the guerrilla warfare which was destroying the french , and thirdly by the fact that a large russian army was following the french , ready to use its strength in case their movement stopped .
the russian army had to act like a whip to a running animal .
and the experienced driver knew it was better to hold the whip raised as a menace than to strike the running animal on the head .
book fifteen : 1812 - 13
chapter i
when seeing a dying animal a man feels a sense of horror : substance similar to his own is perishing before his eyes .
after prince andrew 's death nat'asha and princess mary alike felt this .
drooping in spirit and closing their eyes before the menacing cloud of death that overhung them , they dared not look life in the face .
they carefully guarded their open wounds from any rough and painful contact .
only when alone together were they free from such outrage and pain .
they spoke little even to one another , and when they did it was of very unimportant matters .
both avoided any allusion to the future .
to admit the possibility of a future seemed to them to insult his memory .
still more carefully did they avoid anything relating to him who was dead .
but pure and complete sorrow is as impossible as pure and complete joy .
life did not stand still and it was necessary to live .
she went through the accounts with alp'atych , conferred with dessalles about her nephew , and gave orders and made preparations for the journey to moscow .
nat'asha remained alone and , from the time princess mary began making preparations for departure , held aloof from her too .
" i am not going anywhere , " nat'asha replied when this was proposed to her . "
do please just leave me alone ! "
and she ran out of the room , with difficulty refraining from tears of vexation and irritation rather than of sorrow .
this solitude exhausted and tormented her but she was in absolute need of it .
as soon as anyone entered she got up quickly , changed her position and expression , and picked up a book or some sewing , evidently waiting impatiently for the intruder to go .
she felt all the time as if she might at any moment penetrate that on which - with a terrible questioning too great for her strength - her spiritual gaze was fixed .
she was gazing in the direction in which he had gone - to the other side of life .
she was gazing where she knew him to be ; but she could not imagine him otherwise than as he had been here .
she now saw him again as he had been at myt'ishchi , at tr'oitsa , and at yarosl'avl .
she saw his face , heard his voice , repeated his words and her own , and sometimes devised other words they might have spoken .
there he is lying back in an armchair in his velvet cloak , leaning his head on his thin pale hand .
his chest is dreadfully hollow and his shoulders raised .
his lips are firmly closed , his eyes glitter , and a wrinkle comes and goes on his pale forehead .
one of his legs twitches just perceptibly , but rapidly .
nat'asha knows that he is struggling with terrible pain . "
what is that pain like ?
why does he have that pain ?
what does he feel ?
how does it hurt him ? "
thought nat'asha .
he noticed her watching him , raised his eyes , and began to speak seriously :
" one thing would be terrible , " said he : " to bind oneself forever to a suffering man .
it would be continual torture . "
and he looked searchingly at her .
nat'asha as usual answered before she had time to think what she would say .
she said : " this ca n't go on - it wo n't .
you will get well - quite well . "
she now saw him from the commencement of that scene and relived what she had then felt .
she recalled his long sad and severe look at those words and understood the meaning of the rebuke and despair in that protracted gaze .
" i agreed , " nat'asha now said to herself , " that it would be dreadful if he always continued to suffer .
i said it then only because it would have been dreadful for him , but he understood it differently .
he thought it would be dreadful for me .
he then still wished to live and feared death .
and i said it so awkwardly and stupidly !
i did not say what i meant .
i thought quite differently .
had i said what i thought
, i should have said : even if he had to go on dying , to die continually before my eyes , i should have been happy compared with what i am now .
now there is nothing ...
nobody .
did he know that ?
no , he did not and never will know it .
and now it will never , never be possible to put it right . "
and now he again seemed to be saying the same words to her , only in her imagination
nat'asha this time gave him a different answer .
she stopped him and said : " terrible for you , but not for me !
and in her imagination she said other tender and loving words which she might have said then but only spoke now : " i love thee ! ...
thee !
i love , love ... " she said , convulsively pressing her hands and setting her teeth with a desperate effort ....
she was overcome by sweet sorrow and tears were already rising in her eyes ; then she suddenly asked herself to whom she was saying this .
again everything was shrouded in hard , dry perplexity , and again with a strained frown she peered toward the world where he was .
and now , now it seemed to her she was penetrating the mystery ....
but at the instant when it seemed that the incomprehensible was revealing itself to her a loud rattle of the door handle struck painfully on her ears .
duny'asha , her maid , entered the room quickly and abruptly with a frightened look on her face and showing no concern for her mistress .
" come to your papa at once , please ! "
said she with a strange , excited look .
"
a misfortune ... about peter il'ynich ... a letter
, " she finished with a sob .
chapter ii
besides a feeling of aloofness from everybody nat'asha was feeling a special estrangement from the members of her own family .
she heard duny'asha 's words about peter il'ynich and a misfortune , but did not grasp them .
" what misfortune ?
what misfortune can happen to them ?
they just live their own old , quiet , and commonplace life , " thought nat'asha .
as she entered the ballroom her father was hurriedly coming out of her mother 's room .
his face was puckered up and wet with tears .
he had evidently run out of that room to give vent to the sobs that were choking him .
when he saw nat'asha he waved his arms despairingly and burst into convulsively painful sobs that distorted his soft round face .
" pe ... p'etya ...
go , go , she ... is calling ... " and weeping like a child and quickly shuffling on his feeble legs to a chair , he almost fell into it , covering his face with his hands .
suddenly an electric shock seemed to run through nat'asha 's whole being .
terrible anguish struck her heart , she felt a dreadful ache as if something was being torn inside her
and she were dying .
but the pain was immediately followed by a feeling of release from the oppressive constraint that had prevented her taking part in life .
the sight of her father , the terribly wild cries of her mother that she heard through the door , made her immediately forget herself and her own grief .
she ran to her father , but he feebly waved his arm , pointing to her mother 's door .
princess mary , pale and with quivering chin , came out from that room and taking nat'asha by the arm said something to her .
nat'asha neither saw nor heard her .
she went in with rapid steps , pausing at the door for an instant as if struggling with herself , and then ran to her mother .
the countess was lying in an armchair in a strange and awkward position , stretching out and beating her head against the wall .
s'onya and the maids were holding her arms .
" nat'asha ! nat'asha ! ... " cried the countess .
" it 's not true ... it 's not true ...
he 's lying ...
nat'asha !
" she shrieked , pushing those around her away . "
go away , all of you ; it 's not true !
killed ! ...
ha , ha , ha ! ...
it 's not true ! "
nat'asha put one knee on the armchair , stooped over her mother , embraced her , and with unexpected strength raised her , turned her face toward herself , and clung to her .
" mummy ! ...
darling ! ...
i am here , my dearest mummy , " she kept on whispering , not pausing an instant .
she did not let go of her mother but struggled tenderly with her , demanded a pillow and hot water , and unfastened and tore open her mother 's dress .
" my dearest darling ...
mummy , my precious ! ...
" she whispered incessantly , kissing her head , her hands , her face , and feeling her own irrepressible and streaming tears tickling her nose and cheeks .
the countess pressed her daughter 's hand , closed her eyes , and became quiet for a moment .
suddenly she sat up with unaccustomed swiftness , glanced vacantly around her , and seeing nat'asha began to press her daughter 's head with all her strength .
then she turned toward her daughter 's face which was wincing with pain and gazed long at it .
" nat'asha , you love me ?
" she said in a soft trustful whisper . "
nat'asha , you would not deceive me ?
you 'll tell me the whole truth ? "
nat'asha looked at her with eyes full of tears and in her look there was nothing but love and an entreaty for forgiveness .
" my darling mummy ! " she repeated , straining all the power of her love to find some way of taking on herself the excess of grief that crushed her mother .
and again in a futile struggle with reality her mother , refusing to believe that she could live when her beloved boy was killed in the bloom of life , escaped from reality into a world of delirium .
nat'asha did not remember how that day passed nor that night , nor the next day and night .
she did not sleep and did not leave her mother .
her persevering and patient love seemed completely to surround the countess every moment , not explaining or consoling , but recalling her to life .
during the third night the countess kept very quiet for a few minutes , and nat'asha rested her head on the arm of her chair and closed her eyes , but opened them again on hearing the bedstead creak .
the countess was sitting up in bed and speaking softly .
" how glad i am you have come .
you are tired .
wo n't you have some tea ?
" nat'asha went up to her . "
you have improved in looks and grown more manly , " continued the countess , taking her daughter 's hand .
" mamma !
what are you saying ... "
" nat'asha , he is no more , no more ! "
and embracing her daughter , the countess began to weep for the first time .
chapter iii
princess mary postponed her departure .
s'onya and the count tried to replace nat'asha but could not .
they saw that she alone was able to restrain her mother from unreasoning despair .
the mother 's wounded spirit could not heal .
p'etya 's death had torn from her half her life .
when the news of p'etya 's death had come she had been a fresh and vigorous woman of fifty , but a month later she left her room a listless old woman taking no interest in life .
but the same blow that almost killed the countess , this second blow , restored nat'asha to life .
nat'asha 's wound healed in that way .
she thought her life was ended , but her love for her mother unexpectedly showed her that the essence of life - love - was still active within her .
love awoke and so did life .
prince andrew 's last days had bound princess mary and nat'asha together ; this new sorrow brought them still closer to one another .
princess mary put off her departure , and for three weeks looked after nat'asha as if she had been a sick child .
the last weeks passed in her mother 's bedroom had strained nat'asha 's physical strength .
one afternoon noticing nat'asha shivering with fever , princess mary took her to her own room and made her lie down on the bed .
nat'asha lay down , but when princess mary had drawn the blinds and was going away she called her back .
" i do n't want to sleep , mary , sit by me a little . "
" you are tired - try to sleep . "
" no , no .
why did you bring me away ?
she will be asking for me . "
" she is much better .
she spoke so well today , " said princess mary .
nat'asha lay on the bed and in the semidarkness of the room scanned princess mary 's face .
" is she like him ? " thought nat'asha . "
yes , like and yet not like .
but she is quite original , strange , new , and unknown .
and she loves me .
what is in her heart ?
all that is good .
but how ?
what is her mind like ?
what does she think about me ?
yes , she is splendid ! "
" mary , " she said timidly , drawing princess mary 's hand to herself , " mary , you must n't think me wicked .
no ?
mary darling , how i love you !
let us be quite , quite friends . "
and nat'asha , embracing her , began kissing her face and hands , making princess mary feel shy but happy by this demonstration of her feelings .
from that day a tender and passionate friendship such as exists only between women was established between princess mary and nat'asha .
they were continually kissing and saying tender things to one another and spent most of their time together .
when one went out the other became restless and hastened to rejoin her .
together they felt more in harmony with one another than either of them felt with herself when alone .
a feeling stronger than friendship sprang up between them ; an exclusive feeling of life being possible only in each other 's presence .
sometimes they were silent for hours ; sometimes after they were already in bed they would begin talking and go on till morning .
they spoke most of what was long past .
she did not think of applying submission and self - abnegation to her own life , for she was accustomed to seek other joys , but she understood and loved in another those previously incomprehensible virtues .
for princess mary , listening to nat'asha 's tales of childhood and early youth , there also opened out a new and hitherto uncomprehended side of life : belief in life and its enjoyment .
just as before , they never mentioned him so as not to lower ( as they thought )
their exalted feelings by words ; but this silence about him had the effect of making them gradually begin to forget him without being conscious of it .
nat'asha had grown thin and pale and physically so weak that they all talked about her health , and this pleased her .
it seemed to her that things must be so , and yet it was dreadfully sad .
one day she went quickly upstairs and found herself out of breath .
unconsciously she immediately invented a reason for going down , and then , testing her strength , ran upstairs again , observing the result .
the wound had begun to heal from within .
at the end of january princess mary left for moscow , and the count insisted on nat'asha 's going with her to consult the doctors .
chapter iv
the flight was so rapid that the russian army pursuing the french could not keep up with them ; cavalry and artillery horses broke down , and the information received of the movements of the french was never reliable .
the men in the russian army were so worn out by this continuous marching at the rate of twenty - seven miles a day that they could not go any faster .
the rapidity of the russian pursuit was just as destructive to our army as the flight of the french was to theirs .
the chief cause of the wastage of napoleon 's army was the rapidity of its movement , and a convincing proof of this is the corresponding decrease of the russian army .
but besides this , since the exhaustion and enormous diminution of the army caused by the rapidity of the advance had become evident , another reason for slackening the pace and delaying presented itself to kut'uzov .
the aim of the russian army was to pursue the french .
the road the french would take was unknown , and so the closer our troops trod on their heels the greater distance they had to cover .
only by following at some distance could one cut across the zigzag path of the french .
all the artful maneuvers suggested by our generals meant fresh movements of the army and a lengthening of its marches , whereas the only reasonable aim was to shorten those marches .
to that end kut'uzov 's activity was directed during the whole campaign from moscow to v'ilna - not casually or intermittently but so consistently that he never once deviated from it .
this longing to distinguish themselves , to maneuver , to overthrow , and to cut off showed itself particularly whenever the russians stumbled on the french army .
so it was at kr'asnoe , where they expected to find one of the three french columns and stumbled instead on napoleon himself with sixteen thousand men .
despite all kut'uzov 's efforts to avoid that ruinous encounter and to preserve his troops , the massacre of the broken mob of french soldiers by worn - out russians continued at kr'asnoe for three days .
toll wrote a disposition : " the first column will march to so and so , " etc .
and as usual nothing happened in accord with the disposition .
prince eug`ene of w"urttemberg fired from a hill over the french crowds that were running past , and demanded reinforcements which did not arrive .
the french , avoiding the russians , dispersed and hid themselves in the forest by night , making their way round as best they could , and continued their flight .
who was fond of parleys with the french , sent envoys demanding their surrender , wasted time , and did not do what he was ordered to do .
* knight without fear and without reproach .
" i give you that column , lads , " he said , riding up to the troops and pointing out the french to the cavalry .
these men , carried away by their passions , were but blind tools of the most melancholy law of necessity , but considered themselves heroes and imagined that they were accomplishing a most noble and honorable deed .
chapter v
in 1812 and 1813 kut'uzov was openly accused of blundering .
the emperor was dissatisfied with him .
* history of the year 1812 .
the character of kut'uzov and reflections on the unsatisfactory results of the battles at kr'asnoe , by bogd'anovich .
the hatred and contempt of the crowd punish such men for discerning the higher laws .
still more difficult would it be to find an instance in history of the aim of an historical personage being so completely accomplished as that to which all kut'uzov 's efforts were directed in 1812 .
when count rostopch'in at the ya'uza bridge galloped up to kut'uzov with personal reproaches for having caused the destruction of moscow , and said : " how was it you promised not to abandon moscow without a battle ? "
kut'uzov replied : " and i shall not abandon moscow without a battle , " though moscow was then already abandoned .
what did it matter to him - who then alone amid a senseless crowd understood the whole tremendous significance of what was happening
- what did it matter to him whether rostopch'in attributed the calamities of moscow to him or to himself ?
still less could it matter to him who was appointed chief of the artillery .
but that man , so heedless of his words ,
did not once during the whole time of his activity utter one word inconsistent with the single aim toward which he moved throughout the whole war .
obviously in spite of himself , in very diverse circumstances , he repeatedly expressed his real thoughts with the bitter conviction that he would not be understood .
he alone said that the loss of moscow is not the loss of russia .
in reply to lauriston 's proposal of peace , he said : there can be no peace , for such is the people 's will .
nor do words alone prove that only he understood the meaning of the events .
this procrastinator kut'uzov , whose motto was " patience and time , " this enemy of decisive action , gave battle at borodin'o , investing the preparations for it with unparalleled solemnity .
he alone during the whole retreat insisted that battles , which were useless then , should not be fought , and that a new war should not be begun nor the frontiers of russia crossed .
the source of that extraordinary power of penetrating the meaning of the events then occuring lay in the national feeling which he possessed in full purity and strength .
and only that feeling placed him on that highest human pedestal from which he , the commander in chief , devoted all his powers not to slaying and destroying men but to saving and showing pity on them .
that simple , modest , and therefore truly great , figure could not be cast in the false mold of a european hero - the supposed ruler of men - that history has invented .
to a lackey no man can be great , for a lackey has his own conception of greatness .
chapter vi
the fifth of november was the first day of what is called the battle of kr'asnoe .
his headquarters had that day been transferred .
the day was clear and frosty .
kut'uzov rode to d'obroe on his plump little white horse , followed by an enormous suite of discontented generals who whispered among themselves behind his back .
all along the road groups of french prisoners captured that day ( there were seven thousand of them ) were crowding to warm themselves at campfires .
one of the generals was reporting to him where the guns and prisoners had been captured .
kut'uzov seemed preoccupied and did not listen to what the general was saying .
he screwed up his eyes with a dissatisfied look as he gazed attentively and fixedly at these prisoners , who presented a specially wretched appearance .
most of them were disfigured by frost - bitten noses and cheeks , and nearly all had red , swollen and festering eyes .
one group of the french stood close to the road , and two of them , one of whom had his face covered with sores , were tearing a piece of raw flesh with their hands .
kut'uzov looked long and intently at these two soldiers .
he puckered his face , screwed up his eyes , and pensively swayed his head .
at another spot he noticed a russian soldier laughingly patting a frenchman on the shoulder , saying something to him in a friendly manner , and kut'uzov with the same expression on his face again swayed his head .
" what were you saying ? " he asked the general , who continuing his report directed the commander in chief 's attention to some standards captured from the french and standing in front of the preobrazh'ensk regiment .
" ah , the standards ! " said kut'uzov , evidently detaching himself with difficulty from the thoughts that preoccupied him .
he looked about him absently .
thousands of eyes were looking at him from all sides awaiting a word from him .
he stopped in front of the preobrazh'ensk regiment , sighed deeply , and closed his eyes .
one of his suite beckoned to the soldiers carrying the standards to advance and surround the commander in chief with them .
kut'uzov was silent for a few seconds and then , submitting with evident reluctance to the duty imposed by his position , raised his head and began to speak .
a throng of officers surrounded him .
he looked attentively around at the circle of officers , recognizing several of them .
" i thank you all ! "
he said , addressing the soldiers and then again the officers .
in the stillness around him his slowly uttered words were distinctly heard .
" i thank you all for your hard and faithful service .
the victory is complete and russia will not forget you !
honor to you forever . "
he paused and looked around .
" lower its head , lower it ! "
he said to a soldier who had accidentally lowered the french eagle he was holding before the preobrazh'ensk standards . "
lower , lower , that 's it .
hurrah lads ! "
he added , addressing the men with a rapid movement of his chin .
" hur - r - rah ! "
roared thousands of voices .
while the soldiers were shouting kut'uzov leaned forward in his saddle and bowed his head , and his eye lit up with a mild and apparently ironic gleam .
" you see , brothers ... " said he when the shouts had ceased ... and all at once his voice and the expression of his face changed .
it was no longer the commander in chief speaking but an ordinary old man who wanted to tell his comrades something very important .
there was a stir among the throng of officers and in the ranks of the soldiers , who moved that they might hear better what he was going to say .
" you see , brothers , i know it 's hard for you , but it ca n't be helped !
bear up ; it wo n't be for long now !
we 'll see our visitors off
and then we 'll rest .
the tsar wo n't forget your service .
it is hard for you , but still you are at home while they - you see what they have come to , " said he , pointing to the prisoners . "
worse off than our poorest beggars .
while they were strong we did n't spare ourselves , but now we may even pity them .
they are human beings too .
is n't it so , lads ? "
he looked around , and in the direct , respectful , wondering gaze fixed upon him he read sympathy with what he had said .
his face grew brighter and brighter with an old man 's mild smile , which drew the corners of his lips and eyes into a cluster of wrinkles .
he ceased speaking and bowed his head as if in perplexity .
" but after all who asked them here ?
serves them right , the bloody bastards !
" he cried , suddenly lifting his head .
and flourishing his whip he rode off at a gallop for the first time during the whole campaign , and left the broken ranks of the soldiers laughing joyfully and shouting " hurrah ! "
kut'uzov 's words were hardly understood by the troops .
afterwards when one of the generals addressed kut'uzov asking whether he wished his cal`eche to be sent for , kut'uzov in answering unexpectedly gave a sob , being evidently greatly moved .
chapter vii
when the troops reached their night 's halting place on the eighth of november , the last day of the kr'asnoe battles , it was already growing dusk .
all day it had been calm and frosty with occasional lightly falling snow and toward evening it began to clear .
through the falling snow a purple - black and starry sky showed itself and the frost grew keener .
an infantry regiment which had left tar'utino three thousand strong but now numbered only nine hundred was one of the first to arrive that night at its halting place - a village on the highroad .
the quartermasters who met the regiment announced that all the huts were full of sick and dead frenchmen , cavalrymen , and members of the staff .
there was only one hut available for the regimental commander .
the commander rode up to his hut .
the regiment passed through the village and stacked its arms in front of the last huts .
like some huge many - limbed animal , the regiment began to prepare its lair and its food .
another section amid the regimental wagons and horses which were standing in a group was busy getting out caldrons and rye biscuit , and feeding the horses .
some fifteen men with merry shouts were shaking down the high wattle wall of a shed , the roof of which had already been removed .
" now then , all together - shove ! "
cried the voices , and the huge surface of the wall , sprinkled with snow and creaking with frost , was seen swaying in the gloom of the night .
the lower stakes cracked more and more and at last the wall fell , and with it the men who had been pushing it .
loud , coarse laughter and joyous shouts ensued .
" now then , catch hold in twos !
hand up the lever !
that 's it ....
where are you shoving to ? "
" now , all together !
but wait a moment , boys ...
with a song ! "
all stood silent , and a soft , pleasant velvety voice began to sing .
at the end of the third verse as the last note died away , twenty voices roared out at once : " oo - oo - oo - oo !
that 's it .
all together !
heave away , boys ! ...
" but despite their united efforts the wattle hardly moved , and in the silence that followed the heavy breathing of the men was audible .
" here , you of the sixth company !
devils that you are !
lend a hand ... will you ?
you may want us one of these days . "
" get along ...
falling ?
what are you stopping for ?
there now .... "
merry senseless words of abuse flowed freely .
" what are you up to ? " suddenly came the authoritative voice of a sergeant major who came upon the men who were hauling their burden . "
there are gentry here ; the general himself is in that hut , and you foul - mouthed devils , you brutes , i 'll give it to you ! "
shouted he , hitting the first man who came in his way a swinging blow on the back .
" ca n't you make less noise ? "
the men became silent .
the soldier who had been struck groaned and wiped his face , which had been scratched till it bled by his falling against the wattle .
" there , how that devil hits out !
he 's made my face all bloody , " said he in a frightened whisper when the sergeant major had passed on .
" do n't you like it ? "
said a laughing voice , and moderating their tones the men moved forward .
when they were out of the village they began talking again as loud as before , interlarding their talk with the same aimless expletives .
in the hut which the men had passed , the chief officers had gathered and were in animated talk over their tea about the events of the day and the maneuvers suggested for tomorrow .
it was proposed to make a flank march to the left , cut off the vice - king ( murat ) and capture him .
axes and choppers were plied all around .
everything was done without any orders being given .
stores of wood were brought for the night , shelters were rigged up for the officers , caldrons were being boiled , and muskets and accouterments put in order .
the wattle wall the men had brought was set up in a semicircle by the eighth company as a shelter from the north , propped up by musket rests , and a campfire was built before it .
chapter viii
on the contrary , the army had never under the best material conditions presented a more cheerful and animated aspect .
this was because all who began to grow depressed or who lost strength were sifted out of the army day by day .
all the physically or morally weak had long since been left behind and only the flower of the army - physically and mentally - remained .
more men collected behind the wattle fence of the eighth company than anywhere else .
two sergeants major were sitting with them and their campfire blazed brighter than others .
for leave to sit by their wattle they demanded contributions of fuel .
" eh , mak'eev !
what has become of you , you son of a bitch ?
are you lost or have the wolves eaten you ?
fetch some more wood ! "
shouted a red - haired and red - faced man , screwing up his eyes and blinking because of the smoke but not moving back from the fire . "
and you , jackdaw , go and fetch some wood ! "
said he to another soldier .
this red - haired man was neither a sergeant nor a corporal , but being robust he ordered about those weaker than himself .
" bring it here - that 's fine ! "
they split up the wood , pressed it down on the fire , blew at it with their mouths , and fanned it with the skirts of their greatcoats , making the flames hiss and crackle .
the men drew nearer and lit their pipes .
the handsome young soldier who had brought the wood , setting his arms akimbo , began stamping his cold feet rapidly and deftly on the spot where he stood .
" mother !
the dew is cold but clear ....
it 's well that i 'm a musketeer ... " he sang , pretending to hiccough after each syllable .
" look out , your soles will fly off ! " shouted the red - haired man , noticing that the sole of the dancer 's boot was hanging loose . "
what a fellow you are for dancing ! "
the dancer stopped , pulled off the loose piece of leather , and threw it on the fire .
" right enough , friend , " said he , and , having sat down , took out of his knapsack a scrap of blue french cloth , and wrapped it round his foot .
" it 's the steam that spoils them , " he added , stretching out his feet toward the fire .
" they 'll soon be issuing us new ones .
they say that when we 've finished hammering them , we 're to receive double kits ! "
" and that son of a bitch petr'ov has lagged behind after all , it seems , " said one sergeant major .
" i 've had an eye on him this long while , " said the other .
" well , he 's a poor sort of soldier .... "
" but in the third company they say nine men were missing yesterday . "
" yes , it 's all very well , but when a man 's feet are frozen how can he walk ? "
" eh ? do n't talk nonsense ! " said a sergeant major .
" do you want to be doing the same ? " said an old soldier , turning reproachfully to the man who had spoken of frozen feet .
take me , now !
i 've got no strength left , " he added , with sudden resolution turning to the sergeant major . "
tell them to send me to hospital ; i 'm aching all over ; anyway i sha n't be able to keep up . "
" that 'll do , that 'll do ! " replied the sergeant major quietly .
the soldier said no more and the talk went on .
" what a lot of those frenchies were taken today , and the fact is that not one of them had what you might call real boots on , " said a soldier , starting a new theme .
" they were no more than make - believes . "
" the cossacks have taken their boots .
they were clearing the hut for the colonel and carried them out .
it was pitiful to see them , boys , " put in the dancer . "
as they turned them over one seemed still alive and , would you believe it , he jabbered something in their lingo . "
" well , what do you think ?
they make soldiers of all classes there . "
" but they do n't understand our talk at all , " said the dancer with a puzzled smile .
" i asked him whose subject he was , and he jabbered in his own way .
a queer lot ! "
" was it from the cold ? " asked someone .
" you 're a clever fellow !
from the cold indeed !
why , it was hot .
if it had been from the cold , ours would not have rotted either . '
but , ' he says , ' go up to ours and they are all rotten and maggoty .
so , ' he says , ' we tie our faces up with kerchiefs and turn our heads away as we drag them off : we can hardly do it .
but theirs , ' he says , ' are white as paper and not so much smell as a whiff of gunpowder . ' "
all were silent .
" it must be from their food , " said the sergeant major .
" they used to gobble the same food as the gentry . "
no one contradicted him .
" that peasant near mozh'aysk where the battle was said the men were all called up from ten villages around and they carted for twenty days and still did n't finish carting the dead away .
and as for the wolves , he says ... "
" that was a real battle , " said an old soldier .
" it 's the only one worth remembering ; but since that ... it 's only been tormenting folk . "
pardon ! '
they say .
that 's only one case .
they say pl'atov took ' poleon himself twice .
but he did n't know the right charm .
he catches him and catches him - no good !
he turns into a bird in his hands and flies away .
and there 's no way of killing him either . "
" you 're a first - class liar , kisel"ev , when i come to look at you ! "
" liar , indeed !
it 's the real truth . "
" if he fell into my hands , when i 'd caught him i 'd bury him in the ground with an aspen stake to fix him down .
what a lot of men he 's ruined ! "
" well , anyhow we 're going to end it .
he wo n't come here again , " remarked the old soldier , yawning .
the conversation flagged , and the soldiers began settling down to sleep .
" look at the stars .
it 's wonderful how they shine !
you would think the women had spread out their linen , " said one of the men , gazing with admiration at the milky way .
" that 's a sign of a good harvest next year . "
" we shall want some more wood . "
" you warm your back and your belly gets frozen .
that 's queer . "
" o lord ! "
" what are you pushing for ?
is the fire only for you ?
look how he 's sprawling ! "
in the silence that ensued , the snoring of those who had fallen asleep could be heard .
others turned over and warmed themselves , now and again exchanging a few words .
from a campfire a hundred paces off came a sound of general , merry laughter .
" hark at them roaring there in the fifth company ! " said one of the soldiers , " and what a lot of them there are ! "
one of the men got up and went over to the fifth company .
" they 're having such fun , " said he , coming back .
" two frenchies have turned up .
one 's quite frozen and the other 's an awful swaggerer .
he 's singing songs .... "
" oh , i 'll go across and have a look .... "
and several of the men went over to the fifth company .
chapter ix
the fifth company was bivouacking at the very edge of the forest .
a huge campfire was blazing brightly in the midst of the snow , lighting up the branches of trees heavy with hoarfrost .
about midnight they heard the sound of steps in the snow of the forest , and the crackling of dry branches .
" a bear , lads , " said one of the men .
they all raised their heads to listen , and out of the forest into the bright firelight stepped two strangely clad human figures clinging to one another .
these were two frenchmen who had been hiding in the forest .
they came up to the fire , hoarsely uttering something in a language our soldiers did not understand .
one was taller than the other ; he wore an officer 's hat and seemed quite exhausted .
on approaching the fire he had been going to sit down , but fell .
the other , a short sturdy soldier with a shawl tied round his head , was stronger .
he raised his companion and said something , pointing to his mouth .
the soldiers surrounded the frenchmen , spread a greatcoat on the ground for the sick man , and brought some buckwheat porridge and vodka for both of them .
the exhausted french officer was ramballe and the man with his head wrapped in the shawl was morel , his orderly .
when morel had drunk some vodka and finished his bowl of porridge he suddenly became unnaturally merry and chattered incessantly to the soldiers , who could not understand him .
ramballe refused food and resting his head on his elbow lay silent beside the campfire , looking at the russian soldiers with red and vacant eyes .
occasionally he emitted a long - drawn groan and then again became silent .
morel , pointing to his shoulders , tried to impress on the soldiers the fact that ramballe was an officer and ought to be warmed .
he rose and tried to walk , but staggered and would have fallen had not a soldier standing by held him up .
" you wo n't do it again , eh ? " said one of the soldiers , winking and turning mockingly to ramballe .
" oh , you fool !
why talk rubbish , lout that you are - a real peasant ! "
came rebukes from all sides addressed to the jesting soldier .
they surrounded ramballe , lifted him on the crossed arms of two soldiers , and carried him to the hut .
ramballe put his arms around their necks while they carried him and began wailing plaintively :
" oh , you fine fellows , my kind , kind friends !
these are men !
oh , my brave , kind friends , " and he leaned his head against the shoulder of one of the men like a child .
meanwhile morel was sitting in the best place by the fire , surrounded by the soldiers .
morel , a short sturdy frenchman with inflamed and streaming eyes , was wearing a woman 's cloak and had a shawl tied woman fashion round his head over his cap .
he was evidently tipsy , and was singing a french song in a hoarse broken voice , with an arm thrown round the nearest soldier .
the soldiers simply held their sides as they watched him .
" now then , now then , teach us how it goes !
i 'll soon pick it up .
how is it ? " said the man - a singer and a wag - whom morel was embracing .
" vive henri quatre !
vive ce roi valiant ! "
sang morel , winking . "
ce diable ` a quatre ... " *
* " long live henry the fourth , that valiant king !
that rowdy devil . "
" vivarika !
vif - seruvaru !
sedyablyaka ! "
repeated the soldier , flourishing his arm and really catching the tune .
" bravo !
ha , ha , ha ! " rose their rough , joyous laughter from all sides .
morel , wrinkling up his face , laughed too .
" well , go on , go on ! "
" qui eut le triple talent , de boire , de battre , et d'^etre un vert galant . " *
* who had a triple talent for drinking , for fighting , and for being a gallant old boy ...
" it goes smoothly , too .
well , now , zalet'aev ! "
" fine !
just like the frenchie !
oh , ho ho !
do you want some more to eat ? "
" give him some porridge : it takes a long time to get filled up after starving . "
they gave him some more porridge and morel with a laugh set to work on his third bowl .
all the young soldiers smiled gaily as they watched him .
" they are men too , " said one of them as he wrapped himself up in his coat .
" even wormwood grows on its own root . "
" o lord , o lord !
how starry it is !
tremendous !
that means a hard frost .... "
they all grew silent .
chapter x
everyone assured himself that all would happen according to plan , and therefore insisted that it was just the crossing of the ber"ezina that destroyed the french army .
in reality the results of the crossing were much less disastrous to the french - in guns and men lost - than kr'asnoe had been , as the figures show .
the french crowd fled at a continually increasing speed and all its energy was directed to reaching its goal .
it fled like a wounded animal and it was impossible to block its path .
this was shown not so much by the arrangements it made for crossing as by what took place at the bridges .
that impulse was reasonable .
the condition of fugitives and of pursuers was equally bad .
as long as they remained with their own people each might hope for help from his fellows and the definite place he held among them .
but those who surrendered , while remaining in the same pitiful plight , would be on a lower level to claim a share in the necessities of life .
the most compassionate russian commanders , those favorable to the french - and even the frenchmen in the russian service - could do nothing for the prisoners .
the french perished from the conditions to which the russian army was itself exposed .
it was impossible to take bread and clothes from our hungry and indispensable soldiers to give to the french who , though not harmful , or hated , or guilty , were simply unnecessary .
some russians even did that , but they were exceptions .
certain destruction lay behind the french but in front there was hope .
their ships had been burned , there was no salvation save in collective flight , and on that the whole strength of the french was concentrated .
anticipation that the failure of the petersburg ber"ezina plan would be attributed to kut'uzov led to dissatisfaction , contempt , and ridicule , more and more strongly expressed .
the ridicule and contempt were of course expressed in a respectful form , making it impossible for him to ask wherein he was to blame .
they had heard all that before .
after the junction with the army of the brilliant admiral and petersburg hero wittgenstein , this mood and the gossip of the staff reached their maximum .
kut'uzov saw this and merely sighed and shrugged his shoulders .
only once , after the affair of the ber"ezina , did he get angry and write to bennigsen ( who reported separately to the emperor ) the following letter :
but after bennigsen 's departure , the grand duke tsar'evich constantine p'avlovich joined the army .
he had taken part in the beginning of the campaign but had subsequently been removed from the army by kut'uzov .
now having come to the army , he informed kut'uzov of the emperor 's displeasure at the poor success of our forces and the slowness of their advance .
the emperor intended to join the army personally in a few days ' time .
and he understood this not merely from the attitude of the court .
on the twenty - ninth of november kut'uzov entered v'ilna - his " dear v'ilna " as he called it .
twice during his career kut'uzov had been governor of v'ilna .
in that wealthy town , which had not been injured , he found old friends and associations , besides the comforts of life of which he had so long been deprived .
in undress naval uniform , with a dirk , and holding his cap under his arm , he handed kut'uzov a garrison report and the keys of the town .
the contemptuously respectful attitude of the younger men to the old man in his dotage was expressed in the highest degree by the behavior of chichag'ov , who knew of the accusations that were being directed against kut'uzov .
when speaking to chichag'ov , kut'uzov incidentally mentioned that the vehicles packed with china that had been captured from him at bor'isov had been recovered and would be restored to him .
kut'uzov , shrugging his shoulders , replied with his subtle penetrating smile : " i meant merely to say what i said . "
contrary to the emperor 's wish kut'uzov detained the greater part of the army at v'ilna .
those about him said that he became extraordinarily slack and physically feeble during his stay in that town .
he attended to army affairs reluctantly , left everything to his generals , and while awaiting the emperor 's arrival led a dissipated life .
in spite of the severe frost some hundred generals and staff officers in full parade uniform stood in front of the castle , as well as a guard of honor of the sem"enov regiment .
a minute later the old man 's large stout figure in full - dress uniform , his chest covered with orders and a scarf drawn round his stomach , waddled out into the porch .
there was running to and fro and whispering ; another troyka flew furiously up , and then all eyes were turned on an approaching sleigh in which the figures of the emperor and volk'onski could already be descried .
from the habit of fifty years all this had a physically agitating effect on the old general .
the emperor with a rapid glance scanned kut'uzov from head to foot , frowned for an instant , but immediately mastering himself went up to the old man , extended his arms and embraced him .
and this embrace too , owing to a long - standing impression related to his innermost feelings , had its usual effect on kut'uzov and he gave a sob .
the emperor greeted the officers and the sem"enov guard , and again pressing the old man 's hand went with him into the castle .
when alone with the field marshal the emperor expressed his dissatisfaction at the slowness of the pursuit and at the mistakes made at kr'asnoe and the ber"ezina , and informed him of his intentions for a future campaign abroad .
kut'uzov made no rejoinder or remark .
the same submissive , expressionless look with which he had listened to the emperor 's commands on the field of austerlitz seven years before settled on his face now .
when kut'uzov came out of the study and with lowered head was crossing the ballroom with his heavy waddling gait , he was arrested by someone 's voice saying :
" your serene highness ! "
kut'uzov raised his head and looked for a long while into the eyes of count tolst'oy , who stood before him holding a silver salver on which lay a small object .
kut'uzov seemed not to understand what was expected of him .
suddenly he seemed to remember ; a scarcely perceptible smile flashed across his puffy face , and bowing low and respectfully he took the object that lay on the salver .
it was the order of st. george of the first class .
chapter xi
next day the field marshal gave a dinner and ball which the emperor honored by his presence .
kut'uzov had received the order of st. george of the first class and the emperor showed him the highest honors , but everyone knew of the imperial dissatisfaction with him .
the proprieties were observed and the emperor was the first to set that example , but everybody understood that the old man was blameworthy and good - for - nothing .
the emperor 's displeasure with kut'uzov was specially increased at v'ilna by the fact that kut'uzov evidently could not or would not understand the importance of the coming campaign .
when on the following morning the emperor said to the officers assembled about him : " you have not only saved russia , you have saved europe ! "
they all understood that the war was not ended .
he tried to prove to the emperor the impossibility of levying fresh troops , spoke of the hardships already endured by the people , of the possibility of failure and so forth .
this being the field marshal 's frame of mind he was naturally regarded as merely a hindrance and obstacle to the impending war .
with this object his staff was gradually reconstructed and its real strength removed and transferred to the emperor .
toll , konovn'itsyn , and erm'olov received fresh appointments .
everyone spoke loudly of the field marshal 's great weakness and failing health .
his health had to be bad for his place to be taken away and given to another .
and in fact his health was poor .
the war of 1812 , besides its national significance dear to every russian heart , was now to assume another , a european , significance .
alexander i was as necessary for the movement of the peoples from east to west and for the refixing of national frontiers as kut'uzov had been for the salvation and glory of russia .
kut'uzov did not understand what europe , the balance of power , or napoleon meant .
he could not understand it .
for the representative of the russian people , after the enemy had been destroyed and russia had been liberated and raised to the summit of her glory , there was nothing left to do as a russian .
nothing remained for the representative of the national war but to die , and kut'uzov died .
chapter xii
as generally happens , pierre did not feel the full effects of the physical privation and strain he had suffered as prisoner until after they were over .
after his liberation he reached or"el , and on the third day there , when preparing to go to kiev , he fell ill and was laid up for three months .
he had what the doctors termed " bilious fever . "
but despite the fact that the doctors treated him , bled him , and gave him medicines to drink , he recovered .
scarcely any impression was left on pierre 's mind by all that happened to him from the time of his rescue till his illness .
he remembered only the dull gray weather now rainy and now snowy , internal physical distress , and pains in his feet and side .
on the day of his rescue he had seen the body of p'etya rost'ov .
all this at the time seemed merely strange to pierre : he felt he could not grasp its significance .
but for a long time in his dreams he still saw himself in the conditions of captivity .
a joyous feeling of freedom - that complete inalienable freedom natural to man which he had first experienced at the first halt outside moscow - filled pierre 's soul during his convalescence .
he was surprised to find that this inner freedom , which was independent of external conditions , now had as it were an additional setting of external liberty .
he was alone in a strange town , without acquaintances .
no one demanded anything of him or sent him anywhere .
he had all he wanted : the thought of his wife which had been a continual torment to him was no longer there , since she was no more .
" oh , how good !
oh , how good , how splendid ! "
and by old habit he asked himself the question : " well , and what then ?
what am i going to do ? "
and he immediately gave himself the answer : " well , i shall live .
ah , how splendid ! "
the very question that had formerly tormented him , the thing he had continually sought to find - the aim of life - no longer existed for him now .
that search for the aim of life had not merely disappeared temporarily - he felt that it no longer existed for him and could not present itself again .
and this very absence of an aim gave him the complete , joyous sense of freedom which constituted his happiness at this time .
he could not see an aim , for he now had faith - not faith in any kind of rule , or words , or ideas , but faith in an ever - living , ever - manifest god .
formerly he had sought him in aims he set himself .
in his captivity he had learned that in karat'aev god was greater , more infinite and unfathomable than in the architect of the universe recognized by the freemasons .
he felt like a man who after straining his eyes to see into the far distance finds what he sought at his very feet .
all his life he had looked over the heads of the men around him , when he should have merely looked in front of him without straining his eyes .
in the past he had never been able to find that great inscrutable infinite something .
he had only felt that it must exist somewhere and had looked for it .
in everything near and comprehensible he had seen only what was limited , petty , commonplace , and senseless .
he had equipped himself with a mental telescope and looked into remote space , where petty worldliness hiding itself in misty distance had seemed to him great and infinite merely because it was not clearly seen .
and such had european life , politics , freemasonry , philosophy , and philanthropy seemed to him .
but even then , at moments of weakness as he had accounted them , his mind had penetrated to those distances and he had there seen the same pettiness , worldliness , and senselessness .
and the closer he looked the more tranquil and happy he became .
that dreadful question , " what for ? " which had formerly destroyed all his mental edifices , no longer existed for him .
chapter xiii
in external ways pierre had hardly changed at all .
in appearance he was just what he used to be .
as before he was absent - minded and seemed occupied not with what was before his eyes but with something special of his own .
formerly he had appeared to be a kindhearted but unhappy man , and so people had been inclined to avoid him .
pierre did not in any way seek her approval , he merely studied her with interest .
the most cunning man could not have crept into her confidence more successfully , evoking memories of the best times of her youth and showing sympathy with them .
yet pierre 's cunning consisted simply in finding pleasure in drawing out the human qualities of the embittered , hard , and ( in her own way ) proud princess .
" yes , he is a very , very kind man when he is not under the influence of bad people but of people such as myself , " thought she .
his servants too - ter'enty and v'aska - in their own way noticed the change that had taken place in pierre .
they considered that he had become much " simpler . "
ter'enty , when he had helped him undress and wished him good night , often lingered with his master 's boots in his hands and clothes over his arm , to see whether he would not start a talk .
and pierre , noticing that ter'enty wanted a chat , generally kept him there .
" well , tell me ... now , how did you get food ? " he would ask .
" it 's a pleasure to talk to a man like that ; he is not like our provincials , " he would say .
there were several prisoners from the french army in or"el , and the doctor brought one of them , a young italian , to see pierre .
this officer began visiting pierre , and the princess used to make fun of the tenderness the italian expressed for him .
" if all russians are in the least like you , it is sacrilege to fight such a nation , " he said to pierre .
" you , who have suffered so from the french , do not even feel animosity toward them . "
pierre had evoked the passionate affection of the italian merely by evoking the best side of his nature and taking a pleasure in so doing .
during the last days of pierre 's stay in or"el his old masonic acquaintance count willarski , who had introduced him to the lodge in 1807 , came to see him .
willarski was married to a russian heiress who had a large estate in or"el province , and he occupied a temporary post in the commissariat department in that town .
hearing that bez'ukhov was in or"el , willarski , though they had never been intimate , came to him with the professions of friendship and intimacy that people who meet in a desert generally express for one another .
willarski felt dull in or"el and was pleased to meet a man of his own circle and , as he supposed , of similar interests .
but to his surprise willarski soon noticed that pierre had lagged much behind the times , and had sunk , as he expressed it to himself , into apathy and egotism .
" you are letting yourself go , my dear fellow , " he said .
but for all that willarski found it pleasanter now than it had been formerly to be with pierre , and came to see him every day .
to pierre as he looked at and listened to willarski , it seemed strange to think that he had been like that himself but a short time before .
willarski was a married man with a family , busy with his family affairs , his wife 's affairs , and his official duties .
he regarded all these occupations as hindrances to life , and considered that they were all contemptible because their aim was the welfare of himself and his family .
military , administrative , political , and masonic interests continually absorbed his attention .
there was a new feature in pierre 's relations with willarski , with the princess , with the doctor , and with all the people he now met , which gained for him the general good will .
this was his acknowledgment of the impossibility of changing a man 's convictions by words , and his recognition of the possibility of everyone thinking , feeling , and seeing things each from his own point of view .
this legitimate peculiarity of each individual which used to excite and irritate pierre now became a basis of the sympathy he felt for , and the interest he took in , other people .
the difference , and sometimes complete contradiction , between men 's opinions and their lives , and between one man and another , pleased him and drew from him an amused and gentle smile .
in practical matters pierre unexpectedly felt within himself a center of gravity he had previously lacked .
formerly all pecuniary questions , especially requests for money to which , as an extremely wealthy man , he was very exposed , produced in him a state of hopeless agitation and perplexity . "
to give or not to give ? " he had asked himself .
" i have it and he needs it .
but someone else needs it still more .
who needs it most ?
and perhaps they are both impostors ? "
in the old days he had been unable to find a way out of all these surmises and had given to all who asked as long as he had anything to give .
formerly he had been in a similar state of perplexity with regard to every question concerning his property , when one person advised one thing and another something else .
now to his surprise he found that he no longer felt either doubt or perplexity about these questions .
there was now within him a judge who by some rule unknown to him decided what should or should not be done .
he was as indifferent as heretofore to money matters , but now he felt certain of what ought and what ought not to be done .
pierre refused without the least difficulty or effort , and was afterwards surprised how simple and easy had been what used to appear so insurmountably difficult .
a further proof to pierre of his own more settled outlook on practical matters was furnished by his decision with regard to his wife 's debts and to the rebuilding of his houses in and near moscow .
his head steward came to him at or"el and pierre reckoned up with him his diminished income .
the burning of moscow had cost him , according to the head steward 's calculation , about two million rubles .
" yes , of course that 's true , " said pierre with a cheerful smile .
" i do n't need all that at all .
by being ruined i have become much richer . "
about the same time he received letters from prince vas'ili and other petersburg acquaintances speaking of his wife 's debts .
and pierre decided that the steward 's proposals which had so pleased him were wrong and that he must go to petersburg and settle his wife 's affairs and must rebuild in moscow .
why this was necessary he did not know , but he knew for certain that it was necessary .
his income would be reduced by three fourths , but he felt it must be done .
willarski was going to moscow and they agreed to travel together .
throughout his journey he felt like a schoolboy on holiday .
everyone - the stagecoach driver , the post - house overseers , the peasants on the roads and in the villages - had a new significance for him .
the presence and remarks of willarski who continually deplored the ignorance and poverty of russia and its backwardness compared with europe only heightened pierre 's pleasure .
where willarski saw deadness pierre saw an extraordinary strength and vitality - the strength which in that vast space amid the snows maintained the life of this original , peculiar , and unique people .
he did not contradict willarski and even seemed to agree with him -
an apparent agreement being the simplest way to avoid discussions that could lead to nothing - and he smiled joyfully as he listened to him .
chapter xiv
it would be difficult to explain why and whither ants whose heap has been destroyed are hurrying :
all was destroyed , except something intangible yet powerful and indestructible .
the motives of those who thronged from all sides to moscow after it had been cleared of the enemy were most diverse and personal , and at first for the most part savage and brutal .
one motive only they all had in common : a desire to get to the place that had been called moscow , to apply their activities there .
within a week moscow already had fifteen thousand inhabitants , in a fortnight twenty - five thousand , and so on .
by the autumn of 1813 the number , ever increasing and increasing , exceeded what it had been in 1812 .
the first russians to enter moscow were the cossacks of wintzingerode 's detachment , peasants from the adjacent villages , and residents who had fled from moscow and had been hiding in its vicinity .
the russians who entered moscow , finding it plundered , plundered it in their turn .
they continued what the french had begun .
trains of peasant carts came to moscow to carry off to the villages what had been abandoned in the ruined houses and the streets .
the cossacks carried off what they could to their camps , and the householders seized all they could find in other houses and moved it to their own , pretending that it was their property .
but the first plunderers were followed by a second and a third contingent , and with increasing numbers plundering became more and more difficult and assumed more definite forms .
the french found moscow abandoned but with all the organizations of regular life , with diverse branches of commerce and craftsmanship , with luxury , and governmental and religious institutions .
these forms were lifeless but still existed .
the longer the french remained the more these forms of town life perished , until finally all was merged into one confused , lifeless scene of plunder .
the more the plundering by the french continued , the more both the wealth of moscow and the strength of its plunderers was destroyed .
within a week the peasants who came with empty carts to carry off plunder were stopped by the authorities and made to cart the corpses out of the town .
other peasants , having heard of their comrades ' discomfiture , came to town bringing rye , oats , and hay , and beat down one another 's prices to below what they had been in former days .
gangs of carpenters hoping for high pay arrived in moscow every day , and on all sides logs were being hewn , new houses built , and old , charred ones repaired .
tradesmen began trading in booths .
cookshops and taverns were opened in partially burned houses .
the clergy resumed the services in many churches that had not been burned .
donors contributed church property that had been stolen .
government clerks set up their baize - covered tables and their pigeonholes of documents in small rooms .
the higher authorities and the police organized the distribution of goods left behind by the french .
they abused the police and bribed them , made out estimates at ten times their value for government stores that had perished in the fire , and demanded relief .
and count rostopch'in wrote proclamations .
chapter xv
at the end of january pierre went to moscow and stayed in an annex of his house which had not been burned .
he called on count rostopch'in and on some acquaintances who were back in moscow , and he intended to leave for petersburg two days later .
everybody was celebrating the victory , everything was bubbling with life in the ruined but reviving city .
everyone was pleased to see pierre , everyone wished to meet him , and everyone questioned him about what he had seen .
pierre felt particularly well disposed toward them all , but was now instinctively on his guard for fear of binding himself in any way .
to all questions put to him - whether important or quite trifling - such as : where would he live ?
was he going to rebuild ?
when was he going to petersburg and would he mind taking a parcel for someone ?-
he replied : " yes , perhaps , " or , " i think so , " and so on .
he had heard that the rost'ovs were at kostrom'a but the thought of nat'asha seldom occurred to him .
if it did it was only as a pleasant memory of the distant past .
he felt himself not only free from social obligations but also from that feeling which , it seemed to him , he had aroused in himself .
on the third day after his arrival he heard from the drubetsk'oys that princess mary was in moscow .
the death , sufferings , and last days of prince andrew had often occupied pierre 's thoughts and now recurred to him with fresh vividness .
having heard at dinner that princess mary was in moscow and living in her house - which had not been burned - in vozdv'izhenka street , he drove that same evening to see her .
on his way to the house pierre kept thinking of prince andrew , of their friendship , of his various meetings with him , and especially of the last one at borodin'o .
" is it possible that he died in the bitter frame of mind he was then in ?
is it possible that the meaning of life was not disclosed to him before he died ? " thought pierre .
pierre drove up to the house of the old prince in a most serious mood .
the house had escaped the fire ; it showed signs of damage but its general aspect was unchanged .
" announce me .
perhaps she will see me , " said pierre .
" yes , sir , " said the man . "
please step into the portrait gallery . "
a few minutes later the footman returned with dessalles , who brought word from the princess that she would be very glad to see pierre if he would excuse her want of ceremony and come upstairs to her apartment .
in a rather low room lit by one candle sat the princess and with her another person dressed in black .
pierre remembered that the princess always had lady companions , but who they were and what they were like he never knew or remembered .
" this must be one of her companions , " he thought , glancing at the lady in the black dress .
the princess rose quickly to meet him and held out her hand .
" yes , " she said , looking at his altered face after he had kissed her hand , " so this is how we meet again .
he spoke of you even at the very last , " she went on , turning her eyes from pierre to her companion with a shyness that surprised him for an instant .
" i was so glad to hear of your safety .
it was the first piece of good news we had received for a long time . "
again the princess glanced round at her companion with even more uneasiness in her manner and was about to add something , but pierre interrupted her .
" just imagine - i knew nothing about him ! "
said he .
" i thought he had been killed .
all i know i heard at second hand from others .
i only know that he fell in with the rost'ovs ....
what a strange coincidence ! "
pierre spoke rapidly and with animation .
but when he mentioned the rost'ovs , princess mary 's face expressed still greater embarrassment .
she again glanced rapidly from pierre 's face to that of the lady in the black dress and said :
" do you really not recognize her ? "
pierre looked again at the companion 's pale , delicate face with its black eyes and peculiar mouth , and something near to him , long forgotten and more than sweet , looked at him from those attentive eyes .
" but no , it ca n't be ! " he thought .
" this stern , thin , pale face that looks so much older !
it can not be she .
it merely reminds me of her . "
but at that moment princess mary said , " nat'asha ! "
it suffused him , seized him , and enveloped him completely .
when she smiled doubt was no longer possible , it was nat'asha and he loved her .
at that moment pierre involuntarily betrayed to her , to princess mary , and above all to himself , a secret of which he himself had been unaware .
he flushed joyfully yet with painful distress .
he tried to hide his agitation .
but the more he tried to hide it the more clearly - clearer than any words could have done - did he betray to himself , to her , and to princess mary that he loved her .
" no , it 's only the unexpectedness of it , " thought pierre .
he became confused in his speech and stopped in the middle of what he was saying .
pierre had failed to notice nat'asha because he did not at all expect to see her there , but he had failed to recognize her because the change in her since he last saw her was immense .
only her eyes were kindly attentive and sadly interrogative .
pierre 's confusion was not reflected by any confusion on nat'asha 's part , but only by the pleasure that just perceptibly lit up her whole face .
chapter xvi
" she has come to stay with me , " said princess mary .
" the count and countess will be here in a few days .
the countess is in a dreadful state ; but it was necessary for nat'asha herself to see a doctor .
they insisted on her coming with me . "
" yes , is there a family free from sorrow now ? " said pierre , addressing nat'asha . "
you know it happened the very day we were rescued .
i saw him .
what a delightful boy he was ! "
nat'asha looked at him , and by way of answer to his words her eyes widened and lit up .
" what can one say or think of as a consolation ? " said pierre .
"
nothing !
why had such a splendid boy , so full of life , to die ? "
" yes , in these days it would be hard to live without faith ... " remarked princess mary .
" yes , yes , that is really true , " pierre hastily interrupted her .
" why is it true ? "
nat'asha asked , looking attentively into pierre 's eyes .
" how can you ask why ? " said princess mary .
"
the thought alone of what awaits ... "
nat'asha without waiting for princess mary to finish again looked inquiringly at pierre .
" and because , " pierre continued , " only one who believes that there is a god ruling us can bear a loss such as hers and ... yours . "
nat'asha had already opened her mouth to speak but suddenly stopped .
pierre hurriedly turned away from her and again addressed princess mary , asking about his friend 's last days .
pierre 's confusion had now almost vanished , but at the same time he felt that his freedom had also completely gone .
he felt that there was now a judge of his every word and action whose judgment mattered more to him than that of all the rest of the world .
as he spoke now he was considering what impression his words would make on nat'asha .
he did not purposely say things to please her , but whatever he was saying he regarded from her standpoint .
princess mary - reluctantly as is usual in such cases - began telling of the condition in which she had found prince andrew .
but pierre 's face quivering with emotion , his questions and his eager restless expression , gradually compelled her to go into details which she feared to recall for her own sake .
" yes , yes , and so ... ? " pierre kept saying as he leaned toward her with his whole body and eagerly listened to her story . "
yes , yes ... so he grew tranquil and softened ?
with all his soul he had always sought one thing - to be perfectly good - so he could not be afraid of death .
the faults he had - if he had any - were not of his making .
so he did soften ? ...
what a happy thing that he saw you again , " he added , suddenly turning to nat'asha and looking at her with eyes full of tears .
nat'asha 's face twitched .
she frowned and lowered her eyes for a moment .
she hesitated for an instant whether to speak or not .
" yes , that was happiness , " she then said in her quiet voice with its deep chest notes .
" for me it certainly was happiness . "
she paused . "
and he ...
he ...
he said he was wishing for it at the very moment
i entered the room .... "
nat'asha 's voice broke .
she blushed , pressed her clasped hands on her knees , and then controlling herself with an evident effort lifted her head and began to speak rapidly .
" we knew nothing of it when we started from moscow .
i did not dare to ask about him .
then suddenly s'onya told me he was traveling with us .
i had no idea and could not imagine what state he was in
, all i wanted was to see him and be with him , " she said , trembling , and breathing quickly .
and not letting them interrupt her
she went on to tell what she had never yet mentioned to anyone - all she had lived through during those three weeks of their journey and life at yarosl'avl .
pierre listened to her with lips parted and eyes fixed upon her full of tears .
as he listened he did not think of prince andrew , nor of death , nor of what she was telling .
he listened to her and felt only pity for her , for what she was suffering now while she was speaking .
princess mary , frowning in her effort to hold back her tears , sat beside nat'asha , and heard for the first time the story of those last days of her brother 's and nat'asha 's love .
evidently nat'asha needed to tell that painful yet joyful tale .
she spoke , mingling most trifling details with the intimate secrets of her soul , and it seemed as if she could never finish .
several times she repeated the same thing twice .
dessalles ' voice was heard outside the door asking whether little nicholas might come in to say good night .
" well , that 's all - everything , " said nat'asha .
she got up quickly just as nicholas entered , almost ran to the door which was hidden by curtains , struck her head against it , and rushed from the room with a moan either of pain or sorrow .
pierre gazed at the door through which she had disappeared and did not understand why he suddenly felt all alone in the world .
princess mary roused him from his abstraction by drawing his attention to her nephew who had entered the room .
he wished to take leave of princess mary , but she would not let him go .
"
no , nat'asha
and i sometimes do n't go to sleep till after two , so please do n't go .
i will order supper .
go downstairs , we will come immediately . "
before pierre left the room princess mary told him : " this is the first time she has talked of him like that . "
chapter xvii
pierre was shown into the large , brightly lit dining room ; a few minutes later he heard footsteps and princess mary entered with nat'asha .
nat'asha was calm , though a severe and grave expression had again settled on her face .
they all three of them now experienced that feeling of awkwardness which usually follows after a serious and heartfelt talk .
it is impossible to go back to the same conversation , to talk of trifles is awkward , and yet the desire to speak is there and silence seems like affectation .
they went silently to table .
the footmen drew back the chairs and pushed them up again .
pierre unfolded his cold table napkin and , resolving to break the silence , looked at nat'asha and at princess mary .
they had evidently both formed the same resolution ; the eyes of both shone with satisfaction and a confession that besides sorrow life also has joy .
" do you take vodka , count ? " asked princess mary , and those words suddenly banished the shadows of the past . "
now tell us about yourself , " said she .
" one hears such improbable wonders about you . "
" yes , " replied pierre with the smile of mild irony now habitual to him .
" they even tell me wonders i myself never dreamed of !
mary abr'amovna invited me to her house and kept telling me what had happened , or ought to have happened , to me .
step'an step'anych also instructed me how i ought to tell of my experiences .
in general i have noticed that it is very easy to be an interesting man ( i am an interesting man now ) ; people invite me out and tell me all about myself . "
nat'asha smiled and was on the point of speaking .
" we have been told , " princess mary interrupted her , " that you lost two millions in moscow .
is that true ? "
" but i am three times as rich as before , " returned pierre .
though the position was now altered by his decision to pay his wife 's debts and to rebuild his houses , pierre still maintained that he had become three times as rich as before .
" what i have certainly gained is freedom , " he began seriously , but did not continue , noticing that this theme was too egotistic .
" and are you building ? "
" yes . sav'elich says i must ! "
" no , " answered pierre , evidently not considering awkward the meaning princess mary had given to his words .
" i heard of it in or"el and you can not imagine how it shocked me .
we were not an exemplary couple , " he added quickly , glancing at nat'asha and noticing on her face curiosity as to how he would speak of his wife , " but her death shocked me terribly .
when two people quarrel they are always both in fault , and one 's own guilt suddenly becomes terribly serious when the other is no longer alive .
and then such a death ... without friends and without consolation !
i am very , very sorry for her , " he concluded , and was pleased to notice a look of glad approval on nat'asha 's face .
" yes , and so you are once more an eligible bachelor , " said princess mary .
pierre suddenly flushed crimson and for a long time tried not to look at nat'asha .
when he ventured to glance her way again her face was cold , stern , and he fancied even contemptuous .
" and did you really see and speak to napoleon , as we have been told ? " said princess mary .
pierre laughed .
" no , not once !
everybody seems to imagine that being taken prisoner means being napoleon 's guest .
not only did i never see him but i heard nothing about him - i was in much lower company ! "
supper was over , and pierre who at first declined to speak about his captivity was gradually led on to do so .
" but it 's true that you remained in moscow to kill napoleon ? "
nat'asha asked with a slight smile .
" i guessed it then when we met at the s'ukharev tower , do you remember ? "
pierre admitted that it was true , and from that was gradually led by princess mary 's questions and especially by nat'asha 's into giving a detailed account of his adventures .
princess mary with a gentle smile looked now at pierre and now at nat'asha .
in the whole narrative she saw only pierre and his goodness .
nat'asha , leaning on her elbow , the expression of her face constantly changing with the narrative , watched pierre with an attention that never wandered - evidently herself experiencing all that he described .
not only her look , but her exclamations and the brief questions she put , showed pierre that she understood just what he wished to convey .
it was clear that she understood not only what he said but also what he wished to , but could not , express in words .
the account pierre gave of the incident with the child and the woman for protecting whom he was arrested was this : " it was an awful sight - children abandoned , some in the flames ...
one was snatched out before my eyes ... and there were women who had their things snatched off and their earrings torn out ...
" he flushed and grew confused . "
then a patrol arrived and all the men - all those who were not looting , that is - were arrested , and i among them . "
" i am sure you 're not telling us everything ; i am sure you did something ... " said nat'asha and pausing added , " something fine ? "
pierre continued .
when he spoke of the execution he wanted to pass over the horrible details , but nat'asha insisted that he should not omit anything .
pierre began to tell about karat'aev , but paused .
by this time he had risen from the table and was pacing the room , nat'asha following him with her eyes .
then he added :
" no , you ca n't understand what i learned from that illiterate man - that simple fellow . "
" yes , yes , go on ! " said nat'asha .
" where is he ? "
" they killed him almost before my eyes . "
and pierre , his voice trembling continually , went on to tell of the last days of their retreat , of karat'aev 's illness and his death .
he told of his adventures as he had never yet recalled them .
he now , as it were , saw a new meaning in all he had gone through .
now that he was telling it all to nat'asha
nat'asha without knowing it was all attention : she did not lose a word , no single quiver in pierre 's voice , no look , no twitch of a muscle in his face , nor a single gesture .
she caught the unfinished word in its flight and took it straight into her open heart , divining the secret meaning of all pierre 's mental travail .
princess mary understood his story and sympathized with him , but she now saw something else that absorbed all her attention .
she saw the possibility of love and happiness between nat'asha and pierre , and the first thought of this filled her heart with gladness .
it was three o'clock in the morning .
the footmen came in with sad and stern faces to change the candles , but no one noticed them .
pierre finished his story .
nat'asha continued to look at him intently with bright , attentive , and animated eyes , as if trying to understand something more which he had perhaps left untold .
pierre in shamefaced and happy confusion glanced occasionally at her , and tried to think what to say next to introduce a fresh subject .
princess mary was silent .
it occurred to none of them that it was three o'clock and time to go to bed .
then for heaven 's sake let me again have captivity and horseflesh !
we imagine that when we are thrown out of our usual ruts all is lost , but it is only then that what is new and good begins .
while there is life there is happiness .
there is much , much before us .
i say this to you , " he added , turning to nat'asha .
" yes , yes , " she said , answering something quite different . "
i too should wish nothing but to relive it all from the beginning . "
pierre looked intently at her .
" yes , and nothing more , " said nat'asha .
" it 's not true , not true ! " cried pierre .
" i am not to blame for being alive and wishing to live - nor you either . "
suddenly nat'asha bent her head , covered her face with her hands , and began to cry .
" what is it , nat'asha ? " said princess mary .
" nothing , nothing . "
she smiled at pierre through her tears . "
good night !
it is time for bed . "
pierre rose and took his leave .
princess mary and nat'asha met as usual in the bedroom .
they talked of what pierre had told them .
princess mary did not express her opinion of pierre nor did nat'asha speak of him .
" well , good night , mary ! " said nat'asha . "
do you know , i am often afraid that by not speaking of him " ( she meant prince andrew ) " for fear of not doing justice to our feelings , we forget him . "
princess mary sighed deeply and thereby acknowledged the justice of nat'asha 's remark , but she did not express agreement in words .
" is it possible to forget ? " said she .
" it did me so much good to tell all about it today .
it was hard and painful , but good , very good ! "
said nat'asha .
" i am sure he really loved him .
that is why i told him ...
was it all right ? "
she added , suddenly blushing .
" to tell pierre ?
oh , yes .
what a splendid man he is ! " said princess mary .
out of a moral bath .
is n't it true ? "
" yes , " replied princess mary . "
he has greatly improved . "
" with a short coat and his hair cropped ; just as if , well , just as if he had come straight from the bath ...
papa used to ... "
" i understand why he " ( prince andrew ) " liked no one so much as him , " said princess mary .
" yes , and yet he is quite different .
they say men are friends when they are quite different .
that must be true .
really he is quite unlike him - in everything . "
" yes , but he 's wonderful . "
" well , good night , " said nat'asha .
and the same mischievous smile lingered for a long time on her face as if it had been forgotten there .
chapter xviii
it was a long time before pierre could fall asleep that night .
he paced up and down his room , now turning his thoughts on a difficult problem and frowning , now suddenly shrugging his shoulders and wincing , and now smiling happily .
he was thinking of prince andrew , of nat'asha , and of their love , at one moment jealous of her past , then reproaching himself for that feeling .
it was already six in the morning and he still paced up and down the room .
" well , what 's to be done if it can not be avoided ?
what 's to be done ?
evidently it has to be so , " said he to himself , and hastily undressing he got into bed , happy and agitated but free from hesitation or indecision .
" strange and impossible as such happiness seems , i must do everything that she and i may be man and wife , " he told himself .
a few days previously pierre had decided to go to petersburg on the friday .
when he awoke on the thursday , sav'elich came to ask him about packing for the journey .
" what , to petersburg ?
what is petersburg ?
who is there in petersburg ?
" he asked involuntarily , though only to himself . "
oh , yes , long ago before this happened
i did for some reason mean to go to petersburg , " he reflected .
" why ?
but perhaps i shall go .
what a good fellow he is and how attentive , and how he remembers everything , " he thought , looking at sav'elich 's old face , " and what a pleasant smile he has ! "
" well , sav'elich , do you still not wish to accept your freedom ? "
pierre asked him .
" what 's the good of freedom to me , your excellency ?
we lived under the late count - the kingdom of heaven be his!-and
we have lived under you too , without ever being wronged . "
" and your children ? "
" the children will live just the same .
with such masters one can live . "
" but what about my heirs ? " said pierre . "
supposing i suddenly marry ...
it might happen , " he added with an involuntary smile .
" if i may take the liberty , your excellency , it would be a good thing . "
" how easy he thinks it , " thought pierre . "
he does n't know how terrible it is and how dangerous .
too soon or too late ... it is terrible ! "
" so what are your orders ?
are you starting tomorrow ?
" asked sav'elich .
" no , i 'll put it off for a bit .
i 'll tell you later .
but probably he knows it well enough and is only pretending .
shall i have a talk with him and see what he thinks ? "
pierre reflected . "
no , another time . "
at breakfast pierre told the princess , his cousin , that he had been to see princess mary the day before and had there met-"whom do you think ?
nat'asha rost'ova ! "
the princess seemed to see nothing more extraordinary in that than if he had seen anna sem"enovna .
" do you know her ? " asked pierre .
" i have seen the princess , " she replied .
" i heard that they were arranging a match for her with young rost'ov .
it would be a very good thing for the rost'ovs , they are said to be utterly ruined . "
" no ; i mean do you know nat'asha rost'ova ? "
" i heard about that affair of hers at the time .
it was a great pity . "
" no , she either does n't understand or is pretending , " thought pierre .
" better not say anything to her either . "
the princess too had prepared provisions for pierre 's journey .
" how kind they all are , " thought pierre .
" what is surprising is that they should trouble about these things now when it can no longer be of interest to them .
and all for me ! "
on the same day the chief of police came to pierre , inviting him to send a representative to the faceted palace to recover things that were to be returned to their owners that day .
" and this man too , " thought pierre , looking into the face of the chief of police . "
what a fine , good - looking officer and how kind .
fancy bothering about such trifles now !
and they actually say he is not honest and takes bribes .
what nonsense !
besides , why should n't he take bribes ?
that 's the way he was brought up , and everybody does it .
but what a kind , pleasant face and how he smiles as he looks at me . "
pierre went to princess mary 's to dinner .
as he drove through the streets past the houses that had been burned down , he was surprised by the beauty of those ruins .
the picturesqueness of the chimney stacks and tumble - down walls of the burned - out quarters of the town , stretching out and concealing one another , reminded him of the rhine and the colosseum .
let 's see what will come of it ! "
at the entrance to princess mary 's house pierre felt doubtful whether he had really been there the night before and really seen nat'asha and talked to her . "
perhaps i imagined it ; perhaps i shall go in and find no one there . "
but he had hardly entered the room before he felt her presence with his whole being by the loss of his sense of freedom .
she was in the same black dress with soft folds and her hair was done the same way as the day before , yet she was quite different .
had she been like this when he entered the day before he could not for a moment have failed to recognize her .
she was as he had known her almost as a child and later on as prince andrew 's fianc'ee .
a bright questioning light shone in her eyes , and on her face was a friendly and strangely roguish expression .
pierre dined with them and would have spent the whole evening there , but princess mary was going to vespers and pierre left the house with her .
next day he came early , dined , and stayed the whole evening .
he stayed so long that princess mary and nat'asha exchanged glances , evidently wondering when he would go .
pierre noticed this but could not go .
he felt uneasy and embarrassed , but sat on because he simply could not get up and take his leave .
princess mary , foreseeing no end to this , rose first , and complaining of a headache began to say good night .
" so you are going to petersburg tomorrow ?
" she asked .
" no , i am not going , " pierre replied hastily , in a surprised tone and as though offended .
" yes ... no ... to petersburg ?
tomorrow - but i wo n't say good - by yet .
i will call round in case
you have any commissions for me , " said he , standing before princess mary and turning red , but not taking his departure .
nat'asha gave him her hand and went out .
princess mary on the other hand instead of going away sank into an armchair , and looked sternly and intently at him with her deep , radiant eyes .
the weariness she had plainly shown before had now quite passed off .
with a deep and long - drawn sigh she seemed to be prepared for a lengthy talk .
when nat'asha left the room pierre 's confusion and awkwardness immediately vanished and were replaced by eager excitement .
he quickly moved an armchair toward princess mary .
" yes , i wanted to tell you , " said he , answering her look as if she had spoken . "
princess , help me !
what am i to do ?
can i hope ?
princess , my dear friend , listen !
i know it all .
i know i am not worthy of her
, i know it 's impossible to speak of it now .
but i want to be a brother to her .
no , not that , i do n't , i ca n't ... "
he paused and rubbed his face and eyes with his hands .
" well , " he went on with an evident effort at self - control and coherence . "
i do n't know when i began to love her , but i have loved her and her alone all my life , and i love her so that i can not imagine life without her .
i can not propose to her at present , but the thought that perhaps she might someday be my wife and that i may be missing that possibility ... that possibility ... is terrible .
tell me , can i hope ?
tell me what i am to do , dear princess ! "
he added after a pause , and touched her hand as she did not reply .
" i am thinking of what you have told me , " answered princess mary .
" this is what i will say .
you are right that to speak to her of love at present ... "
princess mary stopped .
" to speak to her now would n't do , " said the princess all the same .
" but what am i to do ? "
" leave it to me , " said princess mary .
" i know ... "
pierre was looking into princess mary 's eyes .
" well ? ...
well ? ... " he said .
" i know that she loves ... will love you , " princess mary corrected herself .
before her words were out , pierre had sprung up and with a frightened expression seized princess mary 's hand .
" what makes you think so ?
you think i may hope ?
you think ... ? "
" yes , i think so , " said princess mary with a smile .
" write to her parents , and leave it to me .
i will tell her when i can .
i wish it to happen and my heart tells me it will . "
" no , it can not be !
how happy i am !
but it ca n't be ....
how happy i am !
no , it ca n't be ! "
pierre kept saying as he kissed princess mary 's hands .
" go to petersburg , that will be best .
and i will write to you , " she said .
" to petersburg ?
go there ?
very well , i 'll go .
but i may come again tomorrow ? "
next day pierre came to say good - by .
is it possible ?
no , it ca n't be , " he told himself at every look , gesture , and word that filled his soul with joy .
when on saying good - by he took her thin , slender hand , he could not help holding it a little longer in his own .
no , that 's impossible ! ... "
" good - by , count , " she said aloud .
" i shall look forward very much to your return , " she added in a whisper .
yes , yes , how did she say it ?
yes , ' i shall look forward very much to your return . '
oh , how happy i am !
what is happening to me ?
how happy i am ! " said pierre to himself .
chapter xix
there was nothing in pierre 's soul now at all like what had troubled it during his courtship of h'el`ene .
there was now not a shadow of doubt in his mind as to whether what he had undertaken was right or wrong .
only one terrible doubt sometimes crossed his mind : " was n't it all a dream ?
is n't princess mary mistaken ?
am i not too conceited and self - confident ?
i believe all this - and suddenly princess mary will tell her , and she will be sure to smile and say : ' how strange !
he must be deluding himself .
does n't he know that he is a man , just a man , while i ... ?
i am something altogether different and higher . ' "
that was the only doubt often troubling pierre .
he did not now make any plans .
the happiness before him appeared so inconceivable that if only he could attain it , it would be the end of all things .
everything ended with that .
a joyful , unexpected frenzy , of which he had thought himself incapable , possessed him .
the whole meaning of life - not for him alone but for the whole world - seemed to him centered in his love and the possibility of being loved by her .
at times everybody seemed to him to be occupied with one thing only - his future happiness .
sometimes it seemed to him that other people were all as pleased as he was himself and merely tried to hide that pleasure by pretending to be busy with other interests .
in every word and gesture he saw allusions to his happiness .
he often surprised those he met by his significantly happy looks and smiles which seemed to express a secret understanding between him and them .
when dealing with the affairs and papers of his dead wife , her memory aroused in him no feeling but pity that she had not known the bliss he now knew .
prince vas'ili , who having obtained a new post and some fresh decorations was particularly proud at this time , seemed to him a pathetic , kindly old man much to be pitied .
often in afterlife pierre recalled this period of blissful insanity .
all the views he formed of men and circumstances at this time remained true for him always .
he not only did not renounce them subsequently , but when he was in doubt or inwardly at variance , he referred to the views he had held at this time of his madness and they always proved correct .
" i may have appeared strange and queer then , " he thought , " but i was not so mad as i seemed .
on the contrary i was then wiser and had more insight than at any other time , and understood all that is worth understanding in life , because ... because i was happy . "
chapter xx
everything : her face , walk , look , and voice , was suddenly altered .
to her own surprise a power of life and hope of happiness rose to the surface and demanded satisfaction .
from that evening she seemed to have forgotten all that had happened to her .
she no longer complained of her position , did not say a word about the past , and no longer feared to make happy plans for the future .
she spoke little of pierre , but when princess mary mentioned him a long - extinguished light once more kindled in her eyes and her lips curved with a strange smile .
the change that took place in nat'asha at first surprised princess mary ; but when she understood its meaning it grieved her . "
can she have loved my brother so little as to be able to forget him so soon ?
" she thought when she reflected on the change .
but when she was with nat'asha she was not vexed with her and did not reproach her .
the reawakened power of life that had seized nat'asha was so evidently irrepressible and unexpected by her that in her presence princess mary felt that she had no right to reproach her even in her heart .
nat'asha gave herself up so fully and frankly to this new feeling that she did not try to hide the fact that she was no longer sad , but bright and cheerful .
when princess mary returned to her room after her nocturnal talk with pierre , nat'asha met her on the threshold .
" he has spoken ?
yes ?
he has spoken ?
" she repeated .
and a joyful yet pathetic expression which seemed to beg forgiveness for her joy settled on nat'asha 's face .
" i wanted to listen at the door , but i knew you would tell me . "
understandable and touching as the look with which nat'asha gazed at her seemed to princess mary , and sorry as she was to see her agitation , these words pained her for a moment .
she remembered her brother and his love .
" but what 's to be done ?
she ca n't help it , " thought the princess .
and with a sad and rather stern look she told nat'asha all that pierre had said .
on hearing that he was going to petersburg nat'asha was astounded .
" to petersburg !
" she repeated as if unable to understand .
but noticing the grieved expression on princess mary 's face she guessed the reason of that sadness and suddenly began to cry .
" mary , " said she , " tell me what i should do !
i am afraid of being bad .
whatever you tell me , i will do .
tell me .... "
" you love him ? "
" yes , " whispered nat'asha .
" then why are you crying ?
i am happy for your sake , " said princess mary , who because of those tears quite forgave nat'asha 's joy .
" it wo n't be just yet - someday .
think what fun it will be when i am his wife and you marry nicholas ! "
" nat'asha , i have asked you not to speak of that .
let us talk about you . "
they were silent awhile .
" but why go to petersburg ? "
nat'asha suddenly asked , and hastily replied to her own question . "
but no , no , he must ...
yes , mary , he must .... "
first epilogue : 1813 - 20
chapter i
seven years had passed .
the storm - tossed sea of european history had subsided within its shores and seemed to have become calm .
but the mysterious forces that move humanity ( mysterious because the laws of their motion are unknown to us ) continued to operate .
though the surface of the sea of history seemed motionless , the movement of humanity went on as unceasingly as the flow of time .
various groups of people formed and dissolved , the coming formation and dissolution of kingdoms and displacement of peoples was in course of preparation .
the sea of history was not driven spasmodically from shore to shore as previously .
it was seething in its depths .
historic figures were not borne by the waves from one shore to another as before .
they now seemed to rotate on one spot .
the historians call this activity of the historical figures " the reaction . "
in dealing with this period they sternly condemn the historical personages who , in their opinion , caused what they describe as the reaction .
there is no one in russian literature now , from schoolboy essayist to learned historian , who does not throw his little stone at alexander for things he did wrong at this period of his reign .
" he ought to have acted in this way and in that way .
in this case he did well and in that case badly .
he also acted badly by concerning himself with the active army and disbanding the sem"enov regiment . "
it would take a dozen pages to enumerate all the reproaches the historians address to him , based on their knowledge of what is good for humanity .
what do these reproaches mean ?
in what does the substance of those reproaches lie ?
the activity of alexander or of napoleon can not be called useful or harmful , for it is impossible to say for what it was useful or harmful .
if that activity displeases somebody , this is only because it does not agree with his limited understanding of what is good .
let us assume that this program was possible and had then been formulated , and that alexander had acted on it .
what would then have become of the activity of all those who opposed the tendency that then prevailed in the government - an activity that in the opinion of the historians was good and beneficent ?
their activity would not have existed : there would have been no life , there would have been nothing .
if we admit that human life can be ruled by reason , the possibility of life is destroyed .
chapter ii
if the aim of the european wars at the beginning of the nineteenth century had been the aggrandizement of russia , that aim might have been accomplished without all the preceding wars and without the invasion .
if the aim was the aggrandizement of france , that might have been attained without the revolution and without the empire .
if the aim was the dissemination of ideas , the printing press could have accomplished that much better than warfare .
if the aim was the progress of civilization , it is easy to see that there are other ways of diffusing civilization more expedient than by the destruction of wealth and of human lives .
why did it happen in this and not in some other way ?
because it happened so ! "
chance created the situation ; genius utilized it , " says history .
but what is chance ?
what is genius ?
the words chance and genius do not denote any really existing thing and therefore can not be defined .
those words only denote a certain stage of understanding of phenomena .
i do not know why a certain event occurs ; i think that i can not know it ; so i do not try to know it
and i talk about chance .
i see a force producing effects beyond the scope of ordinary human agencies ; i do not understand why this occurs
and i talk of genius .
to a herd of rams , the ram the herdsman drives each evening into a special enclosure to feed and that becomes twice as fat as the others must seem to be a genius .
chapter iii
the fundamental and essential significance of the european events of the beginning of the nineteenth century lies in the movement of the mass of the european peoples from west to east and afterwards from east to west .
the commencement of that movement was the movement from west to east .
the ignorance of his colleagues , the weakness and insignificance of his opponents , the frankness of his falsehoods , and the dazzling and self - confident limitations of this man raise him to the head of the army .
the brilliant qualities of the soldiers of the army sent to italy , his opponents ' reluctance to fight , and his own childish audacity and self - confidence secure him military fame .
innumerable so - called chances accompany him everywhere .
the disfavor into which he falls with the rulers of france turns to his advantage .
his attempts to avoid his predestined path are unsuccessful : he is not received into the russian service , and the appointment he seeks in turkey comes to nothing .
during the war in italy he is several times on the verge of destruction and each time is saved in an unexpected manner .
owing to various diplomatic considerations the russian armies - just those which might have destroyed his prestige - do not appear upon the scene till he is no longer there .
on his return from italy he finds the government in paris in a process of dissolution in which all those who are in it are inevitably wiped out and destroyed .
and by chance an escape from this dangerous position presents itself in the form of an aimless and senseless expedition to africa .
again so - called chance accompanies him .
impregnable malta surrenders without a shot ; his most reckless schemes are crowned with success .
the enemy 's fleet , which subsequently did not let a single boat pass , allows his entire army to elude it .
in africa a whole series of outrages are committed against the almost unarmed inhabitants .
and the men who commit these crimes , especially their leader , assure themselves that this is admirable , this is glory - it resembles caesar and alexander the great and is therefore good .
whatever he does succeeds .
the plague does not touch him .
the cruelty of murdering prisoners is not imputed to him as a fault .
his childishly rash , uncalled - for , and ignoble departure from africa , leaving his comrades in distress , is set down to his credit , and again the enemy 's fleet twice lets him slip past .
he had no plan , he was afraid of everything , but the parties snatched at him and demanded his participation .
he is pushed into a meeting of the legislature .
in alarm he wishes to flee , considering himself lost .
he pretends to fall into a swoon and says senseless things that should have ruined him .
chance , millions of chances , give him power , and all men as if by agreement co - operate to confirm that power .
chance puts the duc d'enghien in his hands and unexpectedly causes him to kill him - thereby convincing the mob more forcibly than in any other way that he had the right , since he had the might .
as if measuring themselves and preparing for the coming movement , the western forces push toward the east several times in 1805 , 1806 , 1807 , and 1809 , gaining strength and growing .
in 1811 the group of people that had formed in france unites into one group with the peoples of central europe .
the strength of the justification of the man who stands at the head of the movement grows with the increased size of the group .
during the ten - year preparatory period this man had formed relations with all the crowned heads of europe .
the discredited rulers of the world can oppose no reasonable ideal to the insensate napoleonic ideal of glory and grandeur .
one after another they hasten to display their insignificance before him .
it is not napoleon who prepares himself for the accomplishment of his role , so much as all those round him who prepare him to take on himself the whole responsibility for what is happening and has to happen .
there is no step , no crime or petty fraud he commits , which in the mouths of those around him is not at once represented as a great deed .
the most suitable f^ete the germans can devise for him is a celebration of jena and auerst"adt .
not only is he great , but so are his ancestors , his brothers , his stepsons , and his brothers - in - law .
everything is done to deprive him of the remains of his reason and to prepare him for his terrible part .
and when he is ready so too are the forces .
the invasion pushes eastward and reaches its final goal - moscow .
that city is taken ; the russian army suffers heavier losses than the opposing armies had suffered in the former war from austerlitz to wagram .
the invaders flee , turn back , flee again , and all the chances are now not for napoleon but always against him .
a countermovement is then accomplished from east to west with a remarkable resemblance to the preceding movement from west to east .
paris , the ultimate goal , is reached .
the napoleonic government and army are destroyed .
napoleon himself is no longer of any account ; all his actions are evidently pitiful and mean , but again an inexplicable chance occurs .
the allies detest napoleon whom they regard as the cause of their sufferings .
deprived of power and authority , his crimes and his craft exposed , he should have appeared to them what he appeared ten years previously and one year later - an outlawed brigand .
but by some strange chance no one perceives this .
his part is not yet ended .
chapter iv
the flood of nations begins to subside into its normal channels .
the waves of the great movement abate , and on the calm surface eddies are formed in which float the diplomatists , who imagine that they have caused the floods to abate .
but the smooth sea again suddenly becomes disturbed .
the diplomatists think that their disagreements are the cause of this fresh pressure of natural forces ; they anticipate war between their sovereigns ; the position seems to them insoluble .
but the wave they feel to be rising does not come from the quarter they expect .
it rises again from the same point as before - paris .
the last backwash of the movement from the west occurs : a backwash which serves to solve the apparently insuperable diplomatic difficulties and ends the military movement of that period of history .
the man who had devastated france returns to france alone , without any conspiracy and without soldiers .
any guard might arrest him , but by strange chance no one does so and all rapturously greet the man they cursed the day before and will curse again a month later .
this man is still needed to justify the final collective act .
that act is performed .
the last r^ole is played .
the actor is bidden to disrobe and wash off his powder and paint : he will not be wanted any more .
the manager having brought the drama to a close and stripped the actor shows him to us .
" see what you believed in !
this is he !
do you now see that it was not he
but i who moved you ? "
but dazed by the force of the movement , it was long before people understood this .
still greater coherence and inevitability is seen in the life of alexander i , the man who stood at the head of the countermovement from east to west .
what was needed for him who , overshadowing others , stood at the head of that movement from east to west ?
during the national war he was inactive because he was not needed .
but as soon as the necessity for a general european war presented itself he appeared in his place at the given moment and , uniting the nations of europe , led them to the goal .
the goal is reached .
after the final war of 1815 alexander possesses all possible power .
how does he use it ?
" not unto us , not unto us , but unto thy name ! ...
i too am a man like the rest of you .
let me live like a man and think of my soul and of god . "
a bee settling on a flower has stung a child .
and the child is afraid of bees and declares that bees exist to sting people .
a poet admires the bee sucking from the chalice of a flower and says it exists to suck the fragrance of flowers .
a beekeeper , seeing the bee collect pollen from flowers and carry it to the hive , says that it exists to gather honey .
another beekeeper who has studied the life of the hive more closely says that the bee gathers pollen dust to feed the young bees and rear a queen , and that it exists to perpetuate its race .
a botanist notices that the bee flying with the pollen of a male flower to a pistil fertilizes the latter , and sees in this the purpose of the bee 's existence .
another , observing the migration of plants , notices that the bee helps in this work , and may say that in this lies the purpose of the bee .
but the ultimate purpose of the bee is not exhausted by the first , the second , or any of the processes the human mind can discern .
the higher the human intellect rises in the discovery of these purposes , the more obvious it becomes , that the ultimate purpose is beyond our comprehension .
all that is accessible to man is the relation of the life of the bee to other manifestations of life .
and so it is with the purpose of historic characters and nations .
chapter v
nat'asha 's wedding to bez'ukhov , which took place in 1813 , was the last happy event in the family of the old rost'ovs .
count ily'a rost'ov died that same year and , as always happens , after the father 's death the family group broke up .
he seemed to be unable to understand the meaning of all these events , and bowed his old head in a spiritual sense as if expecting and inviting further blows which would finish him .
he seemed now frightened and distraught and now unnaturally animated and enterprising .
the arrangements for nat'asha 's marriage occupied him for a while .
he ordered dinners and suppers and obviously tried to appear cheerful , but his cheerfulness was not infectious as it used to be : on the contrary it evoked the compassion of those who knew and liked him .
when pierre and his wife had left , he grew very quiet and began to complain of depression .
a few days later he fell ill and took to his bed .
he realized from the first that he would not get up again , despite the doctor 's encouragement .
the countess passed a fortnight in an armchair by his pillow without undressing .
every time she gave him his medicine he sobbed and silently kissed her hand .
on his last day , sobbing , he asked her and his absent son to forgive him for having dissipated their property - that being the chief fault of which he was conscious .
after receiving communion and unction he quietly died ; and next day a throng of acquaintances who came to pay their last respects to the deceased filled the house rented by the rost'ovs .
you do n't meet such men nowadays ....
and which of us has not weaknesses of his own ? "
it was just when the count 's affairs had become so involved that it was impossible to say what would happen if he lived another year that he unexpectedly died .
nicholas was with the russian army in paris when the news of his father 's death reached him .
he at once resigned his commission , and without waiting for it to be accepted took leave of absence and went to moscow .
the state of the count 's affairs became quite obvious a month after his death , surprising everyone by the immense total of small debts the existence of which no one had suspected .
the debts amounted to double the value of the property .
friends and relations advised nicholas to decline the inheritance .
but he regarded such a refusal as a slur on his father 's memory , which he held sacred , and therefore would not hear of refusing and accepted the inheritance together with the obligation to pay the debts .
the creditors who had so long been silent , restrained by a vague but powerful influence exerted on them while he lived by the count 's careless good nature , all proceeded to enforce their claims at once .
as always happens in such cases rivalry sprang up as to which should get paid first , and those who like m'itenka held promissory notes given them as presents now became the most exacting of the creditors .
not one of the plans nicholas tried succeeded ; the estate was sold by auction for half its value , and half the debts still remained unpaid .
nicholas accepted thirty thousand rubles offered him by his brother - in - law bez'ukhov to pay off debts he regarded as genuinely due for value received .
and to avoid being imprisoned for the remainder , as the creditors threatened , he re - entered the government service .
nat'asha and pierre were living in petersburg at the time and had no clear idea of nicholas ' circumstances .
having borrowed money from his brother - in - law , nicholas tried to hide his wretched condition from him .
his position was the more difficult because with his salary of twelve hundred rubles he had not only to keep himself , his mother , and s'onya , but had to shield his mother from knowledge of their poverty .
s'onya kept house , attended on her aunt , read to her , put up with her whims and secret ill - will , and helped nicholas to conceal their poverty from the old countess .
nicholas felt himself irredeemably indebted to s'onya for all she was doing for his mother and greatly admired her patience and devotion , but tried to keep aloof from her .
he seemed in his heart to reproach her for being too perfect , and because there was nothing to reproach her with .
she had all that people are valued for , but little that could have made him love her .
he felt that the more he valued her the less he loved her .
he had taken her at her word when she wrote giving him his freedom and now behaved as if all that had passed between them had been long forgotten and could never in any case be renewed .
nicholas ' position became worse and worse .
the idea of putting something aside out of his salary proved a dream .
not only did he not save anything , but to comply with his mother 's demands he even incurred some small debts .
he could see no way out of this situation .
the idea of marrying some rich woman , which was suggested to him by his female relations , was repugnant to him .
the other way out - his mother 's death - never entered his head .
he wished for nothing and hoped for nothing , and deep in his heart experienced a gloomy and stern satisfaction in an uncomplaining endurance of his position .
he seemed carefully to cherish within himself the gloomy mood which alone enabled him to endure his position .
chapter vi
at the beginning of winter princess mary came to moscow .
from reports current in town she learned how the rost'ovs were situated , and how " the son has sacrificed himself for his mother , " as people were saying .
" i never expected anything else of him , " said princess mary to herself , feeling a joyous sense of her love for him .
remembering her friendly relations with all the rost'ovs which had made her almost a member of the family , she thought it her duty to go to see them .
but remembering her relations with nicholas in vor'onezh
she was shy about doing so .
making a great effort she did however go to call on them a few weeks after her arrival in moscow .
nicholas was the first to meet her , as the countess ' room could only be reached through his .
but instead of being greeted with pleasure as she had expected , at his first glance at her his face assumed a cold , stiff , proud expression she had not seen on it before .
he inquired about her health , led the way to his mother , and having sat there for five minutes left the room .
when the princess came out of the countess ' room nicholas met her again , and with marked solemnity and stiffness accompanied her to the anteroom .
to her remarks about his mother 's health he made no reply . "
what 's that to you ?
leave me in peace , " his looks seemed to say .
" why does she come prowling here ?
what does she want ?
i ca n't bear these ladies and all these civilities ! "
said he aloud in s'onya 's presence , evidently unable to repress his vexation , after the princess ' carriage had disappeared .
" oh , nicholas , how can you talk like that ? " cried s'onya , hardly able to conceal her delight . "
she is so kind and mamma is so fond of her ! "
nicholas did not reply and tried to avoid speaking of the princess any more .
but after her visit the old countess spoke of her several times a day .
she sang her praises , insisted that her son must call on her , expressed a wish to see her often , but yet always became ill - humored when she began to talk about her .
nicholas tried to keep silence when his mother spoke of the princess , but his silence irritated her .
" she is a very admirable and excellent young woman , " said she , " and you must go and call on her .
you would at least be seeing somebody , and i think it must be dull for you only seeing us . "
" but i do n't in the least want to , mamma . "
" you used to want to , and now you do n't .
really i do n't understand you , my dear .
one day you are dull , and the next you refuse to see anyone . "
" but i never said i was dull . "
" why , you said yourself you do n't want even to see her .
she is a very admirable young woman and you always liked her , but now suddenly you have got some notion or other in your head .
you hide everything from me . "
" not at all , mamma . "
" if i were asking you to do something disagreeable now - but i only ask you to return a call .
one would think mere politeness required it ....
well , i have asked you , and now i wo n't interfere any more since you have secrets from your mother . "
" well , then , i 'll go if you wish it . "
" it does n't matter to me .
i only wish it for your sake . "
nicholas sighed , bit his mustache , and laid out the cards for a patience , trying to divert his mother 's attention to another topic .
the same conversation was repeated next day and the day after , and the day after that .
after her visit to the rost'ovs and her unexpectedly chilly reception by nicholas , princess mary confessed to herself that she had been right in not wishing to be the first to call .
" i expected nothing else , " she told herself , calling her pride to her aid . "
i have nothing to do with him and i only wanted to see the old lady , who was always kind to me and to whom i am under many obligations . "
but she could not pacify herself with these reflections ; a feeling akin to remorse troubled her when she thought of her visit .
though she had firmly resolved not to call on the rost'ovs again and to forget the whole matter , she felt herself all the time in an awkward position .
and when she asked herself what distressed her , she had to admit that it was her relation to rost'ov .
one day in midwinter when sitting in the schoolroom attending to her nephew 's lessons , she was informed that rost'ov had called .
with a firm resolution not to betray herself and not show her agitation , she sent for mademoiselle bourienne and went with her to the drawing room .
her first glance at nicholas ' face told her that he had only come to fulfill the demands of politeness , and she firmly resolved to maintain the tone in which he addressed her .
nicholas glanced at her and , wishing to appear not to notice her abstraction , made some remark to mademoiselle bourienne and then again looked at the princess .
she still sat motionless with a look of suffering on her gentle face .
he suddenly felt sorry for her and was vaguely conscious that he might be the cause of the sadness her face expressed .
he wished to help her and say something pleasant , but could think of nothing to say .
" good - by , princess ! " said he .
she started , flushed , and sighed deeply .
" oh , i beg your pardon , " she said as if waking up .
" are you going already , count ?
well then , good - by !
oh , but the cushion for the countess ! "
" wait a moment , i 'll fetch it , " said mademoiselle bourienne , and she left the room .
they both sat silent , with an occasional glance at one another .
" yes , princess , " said nicholas at last with a sad smile , " it does n't seem long ago since we first met at boguch'arovo , but how much water has flowed since then !
in what distress we all seemed to be then , yet i would give much to bring back that time ...
but there 's no bringing it back . "
princess mary gazed intently into his eyes with her own luminous ones as he said this .
she seemed to be trying to fathom the hidden meaning of his words which would explain his feeling for her .
" yes , yes , " said she , " but you have no reason to regret the past , count .
as i understand your present life , i think you will always recall it with satisfaction , because the self - sacrifice that fills it now ... "
" i can not accept your praise , " he interrupted her hurriedly .
" on the contrary i continually reproach myself ....
but this is not at all an interesting or cheerful subject . "
his face again resumed its former stiff and cold expression .
but the princess had caught a glimpse of the man she had known and loved , and it was to him that she now spoke .
" i thought you would allow me to tell you this , " she said .
" i had come so near to you ... and to all your family that i thought you would not consider my sympathy misplaced , but i was mistaken , " and suddenly her voice trembled .
" i do n't know why , " she continued , recovering herself , " but you used to be different , and ... "
" there are a thousand reasons why , " laying special emphasis on the why . "
thank you , princess , " he added softly .
" sometimes it is hard . "
" so that 's why !
that 's why ! "
a voice whispered in princess mary 's soul . "
no , it was not only that gay , kind , and frank look , not only that handsome exterior , that i loved in him .
i divined his noble , resolute , self - sacrificing spirit too , " she said to herself . "
yes , he is poor now
and i am rich ....
yes , that 's the only reason ....
yes , were it not for that ... "
and remembering his former tenderness , and looking now at his kind , sorrowful face , she suddenly understood the cause of his coldness .
" but why , count , why ?
" she almost cried , unconsciously moving closer to him . "
why ?
tell me .
you must tell me ! "
he was silent .
" i do n't understand your why , count , " she continued , " but it 's hard for me ...
i confess it .
for some reason you wish to deprive me of our former friendship .
and that hurts me .
" there were tears in her eyes and in her voice .
" i have had so little happiness in life that every loss is hard for me to bear ....
excuse me , good - by ! "
and suddenly she began to cry and was hurrying from the room .
" princess , for god 's sake ! " he exclaimed , trying to stop her . "
princess ! "
she turned round .
for a few seconds they gazed silently into one another 's eyes - and what had seemed impossible and remote suddenly became possible , inevitable , and very near .
chapter vii
in the winter of 1813 nicholas married princess mary and moved to bald hills with his wife , his mother , and s'onya .
in another three years , by 1820 , he had so managed his affairs that he was able to buy a small estate adjoining bald hills and was negotiating to buy back otr'adnoe - that being his pet dream .
having started farming from necessity , he soon grew so devoted to it that it became his favorite and almost his sole occupation .
nicholas was a plain farmer : he did not like innovations , especially the english ones then coming into vogue .
he always had before his mind 's eye the estate as a whole and not any particular part of it .
when nicholas first began farming and began to understand its different branches , it was the serf who especially attracted his attention .
the peasant seemed to him not merely a tool , but also a judge of farming and an end in himself .
and nicholas ' management produced very brilliant results .
before analyzing the properties of manure , before entering into the debit and credit ( as he ironically called it ) , he found out how many cattle the peasants had and increased the number by all possible means .
he kept the peasant families together in the largest groups possible , not allowing the family groups to divide into separate households .
he was hard alike on the lazy , the depraved , and the weak , and tried to get them expelled from the commune .
he disliked having anything to do with the domestic serfs - the " drones " as he called them - and everyone said he spoiled them by his laxity .
he never felt any hesitation in dealing with the peasants .
he knew that his every decision would be approved by them all with very few exceptions .
he did not allow himself either to be hard on or punish a man , or to make things easy for or reward anyone , merely because he felt inclined to do so .
he could not have said by what standard he judged what he should or should not do , but the standard was quite firm and definite in his own mind .
often , speaking with vexation of some failure or irregularity , he would say : " what can one do with our russian peasants ? " and imagined that he could not bear them .
yet he loved " our russian peasants " and their way of life with his whole soul , and for that very reason had understood and assimilated the one way and manner of farming which produced good results .
she felt he had a world apart , which he loved passionately and which had laws she had not fathomed .
that 's all poetry and old wives ' talk - all that doing good to one 's neighbor !
what i want is that our children should not have to go begging .
i must put our affairs in order while i am alive , that 's all .
and to do that , order and strictness are essential ....
that 's all about it ! "
said he , clenching his vigorous fist . "
and fairness , of course , " he added , " for if the peasant is naked and hungry and has only one miserable horse , he can do no good either for himself or for me . "
and all nicholas did was fruitful - probably just because he refused to allow himself to think that he was doing good to others for virtue 's sake .
his means increased rapidly ; serfs from neighboring estates came to beg him to buy them , and long after his death the memory of his administration was devoutly preserved among the serfs . "
he was a master ... the peasants ' affairs first and then his own .
of course he was not to be trifled with either - in a word , he was a real master ! "
chapter viii
one matter connected with his management sometimes worried nicholas , and that was his quick temper together with his old hussar habit of making free use of his fists .
at first he saw nothing reprehensible in this , but in the second year of his marriage his view of that form of punishment suddenly changed .
once in summer he had sent for the village elder from boguch'arovo , a man who had succeeded to the post when dron died and who was accused of dishonesty and various irregularities .
nicholas went out into the porch to question him , and immediately after the elder had given a few replies the sound of cries and blows were heard .
on returning to lunch nicholas went up to his wife , who sat with her head bent low over her embroidery frame , and as usual began to tell her what he had been doing that morning .
among other things he spoke of the boguch'arovo elder .
countess mary turned red and then pale , but continued to sit with head bowed and lips compressed and gave her husband no reply .
" such an insolent scoundrel ! "
he cried , growing hot again at the mere recollection of him . "
if he had told me he was drunk and did not see ...
but what is the matter with you , mary ?
" he suddenly asked .
countess mary raised her head and tried to speak , but hastily looked down again and her lips puckered .
" why , whatever is the matter , my dearest ? "
the looks of the plain countess mary always improved when she was in tears .
she never cried from pain or vexation , but always from sorrow or pity , and when she wept her radiant eyes acquired an irresistible charm .
the moment nicholas took her hand she could no longer restrain herself and began to cry .
" nicholas , i saw it ... he was to blame , but why do you ...
nicholas ! "
and she covered her face with her hands .
nicholas said nothing .
he flushed crimson , left her side , and paced up and down the room .
he understood what she was weeping about , but could not in his heart at once agree with her that what he had regarded from childhood as quite an everyday event was wrong .
" is it just sentimentality , old wives ' tales , or is she right ? " he asked himself .
before he had solved that point he glanced again at her face filled with love and pain , and he suddenly realized that she was right and that he had long been sinning against himself .
" mary , " he said softly , going up to her , " it will never happen again ; i give you my word .
never , " he repeated in a trembling voice like a boy asking for forgiveness .
the tears flowed faster still from the countess ' eyes .
she took his hand and kissed it .
" nicholas , when did you break your cameo ? " she asked to change the subject , looking at his finger on which he wore a ring with a cameo of laoco"on 's head .
" today - it was the same affair .
oh , mary , do n't remind me of it ! "
and again he flushed .
" i give you my word of honor it sha n't occur again , and let this always be a reminder to me , " and he pointed to the broken ring .
but he did forget himself once or twice within a twelvemonth , and then he would go and confess to his wife , and would again promise that this should really be the very last time .
" mary , you must despise me ! " he would say .
" i deserve it . "
" you should go , go away at once , if you do n't feel strong enough to control yourself , " she would reply sadly , trying to comfort her husband .
among the gentry of the province nicholas was respected but not liked .
he did not concern himself with the interests of his own class , and consequently some thought him proud and others thought him stupid .
the whole summer , from spring sowing to harvest , he was busy with the work on his farm .
in autumn he gave himself up to hunting with the same business - like seriousness - leaving home for a month , or even two , with his hunt .
in winter he visited his other villages or spent his time reading .
the books he read were chiefly historical , and on these he spent a certain sum every year .
he was collecting , as he said , a serious library , and he made it a rule to read through all the books he bought .
in winter , except for business excursions , he spent most of his time at home making himself one with his family and entering into all the details of his children 's relations with their mother .
the harmony between him and his wife grew closer and closer and he daily discovered fresh spiritual treasures in her .
from the time of his marriage s'onya had lived in his house .
before that , nicholas had told his wife all that had passed between himself and s'onya , blaming himself and commending her .
he had asked princess mary to be gentle and kind to his cousin .
she thoroughly realized the wrong he had done s'onya , felt herself to blame toward her , and imagined that her wealth had influenced nicholas ' choice .
she could not find fault with s'onya in any way and tried to be fond of her , but often felt ill - will toward her which she could not overcome .
once she had a talk with her friend nat'asha about s'onya and about her own injustice toward her .
" you know , " said nat'asha , " you have read the gospels a great deal - there is a passage in them that just fits s'onya . "
" what ? " asked countess mary , surprised .
" ' to him that hath shall be given , and from him that hath not shall be taken away . '
you remember ?
she is one that hath not ; why , i do n't know .
perhaps she lacks egotism , i do n't know , but from her is taken away , and everything has been taken away .
sometimes i am dreadfully sorry for her .
formerly i very much wanted nicholas to marry her , but i always had a sort of presentiment that it would not come off .
she is a sterile flower , you know - like some strawberry blossoms .
sometimes i am sorry for her , and sometimes i think she does n't feel it as you or i would . "
though countess mary told nat'asha that those words in the gospel must be understood differently , yet looking at s'onya she agreed with nat'asha 's explanation .
it really seemed that s'onya did not feel her position trying , and had grown quite reconciled to her lot as a sterile flower .
she seemed to be fond not so much of individuals as of the family as a whole .
like a cat , she had attached herself not to the people but to the home .
she waited on the old countess , petted and spoiled the children , was always ready to render the small services for which she had a gift , and all this was unconsciously accepted from her with insufficient gratitude .
the country seat at bald hills had been rebuilt , though not on the same scale as under the old prince .
the buildings , begun under straitened circumstances , were more than simple .
the immense house on the old stone foundations was of wood , plastered only inside .
it had bare deal floors and was furnished with very simple hard sofas , armchairs , tables , and chairs made by their own serf carpenters out of their own birchwood .
the house was spacious and had rooms for the house serfs and apartments for visitors .
whole families of the rost'ovs ' and bolk'onskis ' relations sometimes came to bald hills with sixteen horses and dozens of servants and stayed for months .
besides that , four times a year , on the name days and birthdays of the hosts , as many as a hundred visitors would gather there for a day or two .
the rest of the year life pursued its unbroken routine with its ordinary occupations , and its breakfasts , lunches , dinners , and suppers , provided out of the produce of the estate .
chapter ix
it was the eve of st. nicholas , the fifth of december , 1820 .
nat'asha had been staying at her brother 's with her husband and children since early autumn .
pierre had gone to petersburg on business of his own for three weeks as he said , but had remained there nearly seven weeks and was expected back every minute .
besides the bez'ukhov family , nicholas ' old friend the retired general vas'ili dm'itrich den'isov was staying with the rost'ovs this fifth of december .
he examined the bailiff 's accounts of the village in ryaz'an which belonged to his wife 's nephew , wrote two business letters , and walked over to the granaries , cattle yards and stables before dinner .
countess mary sat at the other end of the table .
but today she quite forgot that and was hurt that he should be angry with her without any reason , and she felt unhappy .
she asked him where he had been .
he replied .
she again inquired whether everything was going well on the farm .
her unnatural tone made him wince unpleasantly and he replied hastily .
" then i 'm not mistaken , " thought countess mary .
" why is he cross with me ? "
she concluded from his tone that he was vexed with her and wished to end the conversation .
she knew her remarks sounded unnatural , but could not refrain from asking some more questions .
thanks to den'isov the conversation at table soon became general and lively , and she did not talk to her husband .
when they left the table and went as usual to thank the old countess , countess mary held out her hand and kissed her husband , and asked him why he was angry with her .
" you always have such strange fancies !
i did n't even think of being angry , " he replied .
but the word always seemed to her to imply : " yes , i am angry but i wo n't tell you why . "
" well , messieurs et mesdames , " said nicholas loudly and with apparent cheerfulness
( it seemed to countess mary that he did it on purpose to vex her ) , " i have been on my feet since six this morning .
tomorrow i shall have to suffer , so today i 'll go and rest . "
and without a word to his wife he went to the little sitting room and lay down on the sofa .
" that 's always the way , " thought countess mary . "
he talks to everyone except me .
i see ...
i see that i am repulsive to him , especially when i am in this condition .
" she looked down at her expanded figure and in the glass at her pale , sallow , emaciated face in which her eyes now looked larger than ever .
and everything annoyed her - den'isov 's shouting and laughter , nat'asha 's talk , and especially a quick glance s'onya gave her .
s'onya was always the first excuse countess mary found for feeling irritated .
having sat awhile with her visitors without understanding anything of what they were saying , she softly left the room and went to the nursery .
the children were playing at " going to moscow " in a carriage made of chairs and invited her to go with them .
she sat down and played with them a little , but the thought of her husband and his unreasonable crossness worried her .
she got up and , walking on tiptoe with difficulty , went to the small sitting room .
" perhaps he is not asleep ; i 'll have an explanation with him , " she said to herself .
little andrew , her eldest boy , imitating his mother , followed her on tiptoe .
she did not notice him .
" mary , dear , i think he is asleep - he was so tired , " said s'onya , meeting her in the large sitting room
( it seemed to countess mary that she crossed her path everywhere ) . "
andrew may wake him . "
countess mary looked round , saw little andrew following her , felt that s'onya was right , and for that very reason flushed and with evident difficulty refrained from saying something harsh .
she made no reply , but to avoid obeying s'onya beckoned to andrew to follow her quietly and went to the door .
s'onya went away by another door .
from the room in which nicholas was sleeping came the sound of his even breathing , every slightest tone of which was familiar to his wife .
as she listened to it she saw before her his smooth handsome forehead , his mustache , and his whole face , as she had so often seen it in the stillness of the night when he slept .
nicholas suddenly moved and cleared his throat .
and at that moment little andrew shouted from outside the door : "
papa !
mamma 's standing here ! "
countess mary turned pale with fright and made signs to the boy .
he grew silent , and quiet ensued for a moment , terrible to countess mary .
she knew how nicholas disliked being waked .
then through the door she heard nicholas clearing his throat again and stirring , and his voice said crossly :
" i ca n't get a moment 's peace ....
mary , is that you ?
why did you bring him here ? "
" i only came in to look and did not notice ... forgive me .... "
nicholas coughed and said no more .
countess mary moved away from the door and took the boy back to the nursery .
nicholas turned with a tender smile on his face .
" nat'asha , nat'asha ! " came countess mary 's frightened whisper from the door .
" papa wants to sleep . "
" no , mamma , he does n't want to sleep , " said little nat'asha with conviction .
" he 's laughing . "
nicholas lowered his legs , rose , and took his daughter in his arms .
" come in , mary , " he said to his wife .
she went in and sat down by her husband .
" i did not notice him following me , " she said timidly .
" i just looked in . "
holding his little girl with one arm , nicholas glanced at his wife and , seeing her guilty expression , put his other arm around her and kissed her hair .
" may i kiss mamma ?
" he asked nat'asha .
nat'asha smiled bashfully .
" again ! " she commanded , pointing with a peremptory gesture to the spot where nicholas had placed the kiss .
" i do n't know why you think i am cross , " said nicholas , replying to the question he knew was in his wife 's mind .
" you have no idea how unhappy , how lonely , i feel when you are like that .
it always seems to me ... "
" mary , do n't talk nonsense .
you ought to be ashamed of yourself ! "
he said gaily .
" it seems to be that you ca n't love me , that i am so plain ... always ... and now ... in this cond ... "
" oh , how absurd you are !
it is not beauty that endears , it 's love that makes us see beauty .
it is only malv'inas and women of that kind who are loved for their beauty .
but do i love my wife ?
i do n't love her , but ...
i do n't know how to put it .
without you , or when something comes between us like this , i seem lost and ca n't do anything .
now do i love my finger ?
i do n't love it , but just try to cut it off ! "
" i 'm not like that myself , but i understand .
so you 're not angry with me ? "
" awfully angry ! " he said , smiling and getting up .
and smoothing his hair he began to pace the room .
" do you know , mary , what i 've been thinking ?
" he began , immediately thinking aloud in his wife 's presence now that they had made it up .
he did not ask if she was ready to listen to him .
he did not care .
a thought had occurred to him and so it belonged to her also .
and he told her of his intention to persuade pierre to stay with them till spring .
countess mary listened till he had finished , made some remark , and in her turn began thinking aloud .
her thoughts were about the children .
" you can see the woman in her already , " she said in french , pointing to little nat'asha .
" you reproach us women with being illogical .
here is our logic .
i say : ' papa wants to sleep ! '
but she says , ' no , he 's laughing . '
and she was right , " said countess mary with a happy smile .
" yes , yes . "
and nicholas , taking his little daughter in his strong hand , lifted her high , placed her on his shoulder , held her by the legs , and paced the room with her .
there was an expression of carefree happiness on the faces of both father and daughter .
" but you know you may be unfair .
you are too fond of this one , " his wife whispered in french .
" yes , but what am i to do ? ...
i try not to show ... "
at that moment they heard the sound of the door pulley and footsteps in the hall and anteroom , as if someone had arrived .
" somebody has come . "
" i am sure it is pierre .
i will go and see , " said countess mary and left the room .
in her absence nicholas allowed himself to give his little daughter a gallop round the room .
out of breath , he took the laughing child quickly from his shoulder and pressed her to his heart .
" it is he , it is he , nicholas ! " said countess mary , re - entering the room a few minutes later .
" now our nat'asha has come to life .
you should have seen her ecstasy , and how he caught it for having stayed away so long .
well , come along now , quick , quick !
it 's time you two were parted , " she added , looking smilingly at the little girl who clung to her father .
nicholas went out holding the child by the hand .
countess mary remained in the sitting room .
" i should never , never have believed that one could be so happy , " she whispered to herself .
chapter x
nat'asha had married in the early spring of 1813 , and in 1820 already had three daughters besides a son for whom she had longed and whom she was now nursing .
she had grown stouter and broader , so that it was difficult to recognize in this robust , motherly woman the slim , lively nat'asha of former days .
her features were more defined and had a calm , soft , and serene expression .
in her face there was none of the ever - glowing animation that had formerly burned there and constituted its charm .
now her face and body were often all that one saw , and her soul was not visible at all .
all that struck the eye was a strong , handsome , and fertile woman .
the old fire very rarely kindled in her face now .
at the rare moments when the old fire did kindle in her handsome , fully developed body she was even more attractive than in former days .
since their marriage nat'asha and her husband had lived in moscow , in petersburg , on their estate near moscow , or with her mother , that is to say , in nicholas ' house .
the young countess bez'ukhova was not often seen in society , and those who met her there were not pleased with her and found her neither attractive nor amiable .
not that nat'asha liked solitude - she did not know whether she liked it or not , she even thought that she did not -
but with her pregnancies , her confinements , the nursing of her children , and sharing every moment of her husband 's life , she had demands on her time which could be satisfied only by renouncing society .
all who had known nat'asha before her marriage wondered at the change in her as at something extraordinary .
" only she lets her love of her husband and children overflow all bounds , " said the countess , " so that it even becomes absurd . "
nat'asha on the contrary had at once abandoned all her witchery , of which her singing had been an unusually powerful part .
she gave it up just because it was so powerfully seductive .
she acted in contradiction to all those rules .
she felt that her unity with her husband was not maintained by the poetic feelings that had attracted him to her , but by something else - indefinite but firm as the bond between her own body and soul .
to fluff out her curls , put on fashionable dresses , and sing romantic songs to fascinate her husband would have seemed as strange as to adorn herself to attract herself .
to adorn herself for others might perhaps have been agreeable -
she did not know -
but she had no time at all for it .
the chief reason for devoting no time either to singing , to dress , or to choosing her words was that she really had no time to spare for these things .
and the deeper she penetrated , not with her mind only but with her whole soul , her whole being , into the subject that absorbed her , the larger did that subject grow and the weaker and more inadequate
did her powers appear , so that she concentrated them wholly on that one thing and yet was unable to accomplish all that she considered necessary .
if the purpose of marriage is the family , the person who wishes to have many wives or husbands may perhaps obtain much pleasure , but in that case will not have a family .
nat'asha needed a husband .
a husband was given her and he gave her a family .
nat'asha did not care for society in general , but prized the more the society of her relatives - countess mary , and her brother , her mother , and s'onya .
the general opinion was that pierre was under his wife 's thumb , which was really true .
from the very first days of their married life nat'asha had announced her demands .
pierre was greatly surprised by his wife 's view , to him a perfectly novel one , that every moment of his life belonged to her and to the family .
his wife 's demands astonished him , but they also flattered him , and he submitted to them .
to make up for this , at home pierre had the right to regulate his life and that of the whole family exactly as he chose .
at home nat'asha placed herself in the position of a slave to her husband , and the whole household went on tiptoe when he was occupied - that is , was reading or writing in his study .
pierre had but to show a partiality for anything to get just what he liked done always .
he had only to express a wish and nat'asha would jump up and run to fulfill it .
the entire household was governed according to pierre 's supposed orders , that is , by his wishes which nat'asha tried to guess .
and she deduced the essentials of his wishes quite correctly , and having once arrived at them clung to them tenaciously .
when pierre himself wanted to change his mind she would fight him with his own weapons .
after seven years of marriage pierre had the joyous and firm consciousness that he was not a bad man , and he felt this because he saw himself reflected in his wife .
he felt the good and bad within himself inextricably mingled and overlapping .
but only what was really good in him was reflected in his wife , all that was not quite good was rejected .
and this was not the result of logical reasoning but was a direct and mysterious reflection .
chapter xi
on reading that letter ( she always read her husband 's letters )
nat'asha herself suggested that he should go to petersburg , though she would feel his absence very acutely .
she attributed immense importance to all her husband 's intellectual and abstract interests though she did not understand them , and she always dreaded being a hindrance to him in such matters .
to pierre 's timid look of inquiry after reading the letter she replied by asking him to go , but to fix a definite date for his return .
he was given four weeks ' leave of absence .
ever since that leave of absence had expired , more than a fortnight before , nat'asha had been in a constant state of alarm , depression , and irritability .
den'isov , now a general on the retired list and much dissatisfied with the present state of affairs , had arrived during that fortnight .
he looked at nat'asha with sorrow and surprise as at a bad likeness of a person once dear .
a dull , dejected look , random replies , and talk about the nursery was all he saw and heard from his former enchantress .
" it 's all nonsense , all rubbish - those discussions which lead to nothing and all those idiotic societies ! "
nat'asha declared of the very affairs in the immense importance of which she firmly believed .
and she would go to the nursery to nurse p'etya , her only boy .
no one else could tell her anything so comforting or so reasonable as this little three - month - old creature when he lay at her breast
and she was conscious of the movement of his lips and the snuffling of his little nose .
that creature said : " you are angry , you are jealous , you would like to pay him out , you are afraid - but here am i !
and i am he ... " and that was unanswerable .
it was more than true .
during that fortnight of anxiety nat'asha resorted to the baby for comfort so often , and fussed over him so much , that she overfed him and he fell ill .
she was terrified by his illness , and yet that was just what she needed .
while attending to him she bore the anxiety about her husband more easily .
" has he come ? "
nat'asha asked quickly in a whisper , afraid to move lest she should rouse the dozing baby .
" he 's come , ma'am , " whispered the nurse .
the blood rushed to nat'asha 's face and her feet involuntarily moved , but she could not jump up and run out .
the baby again opened his eyes and looked at her .
" you 're here ? "
he seemed to be saying , and again lazily smacked his lips .
cautiously withdrawing her breast , nat'asha rocked him a little , handed him to the nurse , and went with rapid steps toward the door .
but at the door she stopped as if her conscience reproached her for having in her joy left the child too soon , and she glanced round .
the nurse with raised elbows was lifting the infant over the rail of his cot .
" go , ma'am !
do n't worry , go ! "
she whispered , smiling , with the kind of familiarity that grows up between a nurse and her mistress .
nat'asha ran with light footsteps to the anteroom .
den'isov , who had come out of the study into the dancing room with his pipe , now for the first time recognized the old nat'asha .
a flood of brilliant , joyful light poured from her transfigured face .
" he 's come ! " she exclaimed as she ran past , and den'isov felt that he too was delighted that pierre , whom he did not much care for , had returned .
on reaching the vestibule nat'asha saw a tall figure in a fur coat unwinding his scarf .
" it 's he !
it 's really he !
he has come ! "
she said to herself , and rushing at him embraced him , pressed his head to her breast , and then pushed him back and gazed at his ruddy , happy face , covered with hoarfrost . "
yes , it is he , happy and contented .... "
" yes , it 's all very well for you .
you are pleased , you 've had a good time ....
but what about me ?
you might at least have shown consideration for the children .
i am nursing and my milk was spoiled ....
p'etya was at death 's door .
but you were enjoying yourself .
yes , enjoying ... "
he wanted to smile but dared not even think of doing so .
he made a piteous , frightened face and bent down .
" i could not , on my honor .
but how is p'etya ? "
" all right now .
come along !
i wonder you 're not ashamed !
if only you could see what i was like without you , how i suffered ! "
" you are well ? "
" come , come ! "
she said , not letting go of his arm .
and they went to their rooms .
when nicholas and his wife came to look for pierre he was in the nursery holding his baby son , who was again awake , on his huge right palm and dandling him .
a blissful bright smile was fixed on the baby 's broad face with its toothless open mouth .
the storm was long since over and there was bright , joyous sunshine on nat'asha 's face as she gazed tenderly at her husband and child .
" and have you talked everything well over with prince theodore ? "
she asked .
" yes , capitally . "
" you see , he holds it up . "
( she meant the baby 's head . ) "
but how he did frighten me ...
you 've seen the princess ?
is it true
she 's in love with that ... "
" yes , just fancy ... "
at that moment nicholas and countess mary came in .
pierre with the baby on his hand stooped , kissed them , and replied to their inquiries .
but in spite of much that was interesting and had to be discussed , the baby with the little cap on its unsteady head evidently absorbed all his attention .
" how sweet ! " said countess mary , looking at and playing with the baby . "
now , nicholas , " she added , turning to her husband , " i ca n't understand how it is you do n't see the charm of these delicious marvels . "
" i do n't and ca n't , " replied nicholas , looking coldly at the baby . "
a lump of flesh .
come along , pierre ! "
" and yet he 's such an affectionate father , " said countess mary , vindicating her husband , " but only after they are a year old or so ... "
" now , pierre nurses them splendidly , " said nat'asha . "
he says his hand is just made for a baby 's seat .
just look ! "
" only not for this ... " pierre suddenly exclaimed with a laugh , and shifting the baby he gave him to the nurse .
chapter xii
as in every large household , there were at bald hills several perfectly distinct worlds which merged into one harmonious whole , though each retained its own peculiarities and made concessions to the others .
every event , joyful or sad , that took place in that house was important to all these worlds , but each had its own special reasons to rejoice or grieve over that occurrence independently of the others .
for instance , pierre 's return was a joyful and important event and they all felt it to be so .
the children and their governesses were glad of pierre 's return because no one else drew them into the social life of the household as he did .
no one had instilled into him this love for pierre whom he saw only occasionally .
countess mary who had brought him up had done her utmost to make him love her husband as she loved him , and little nicholas did love his uncle , but loved him with just a shade of contempt .
pierre , however , he adored .
he did not want to be an hussar or a knight of st. george like his uncle nicholas ; he wanted to be learned , wise , and kind like pierre .
in pierre 's presence his face always shone with pleasure and he flushed and was breathless when pierre spoke to him .
he did not miss a single word he uttered , and would afterwards , with dessalles or by himself , recall and reconsider the meaning of everything pierre had said .
but the father whom the boy did not remember appeared to him a divinity who could not be pictured , and of whom he never thought without a swelling heart and tears of sadness and rapture .
so the boy also was happy that pierre had arrived .
the guests welcomed pierre because he always helped to enliven and unite any company he was in .
the grown - up members of the family , not to mention his wife , were pleased to have back a friend whose presence made life run more smoothly and peacefully .
the old ladies were pleased with the presents he brought them , and especially that nat'asha would now be herself again .
pierre felt the different outlooks of these various worlds and made haste to satisfy all their expectations .
but in time he grew used to this demand .
if he now incurred nat'asha 's censure it was only for buying too many and too expensive things .
to her other defects ( as most people thought them , but which to pierre were qualities ) of untidiness and neglect of herself , she now added stinginess .
life was cheaper because it was circumscribed : that most expensive luxury , the kind of life that can be changed at any moment , was no longer his nor did he wish for it .
he felt that his way of life had now been settled once for all till death and that to change it was not in his power , and so that way of life proved economical .
with a merry , smiling face pierre was sorting his purchases .
" what do you think of this ? " said he , unrolling a piece of stuff like a shopman .
nat'asha , who was sitting opposite to him with her eldest daughter on her lap , turned her sparkling eyes swiftly from her husband to the things he showed her .
" that 's for bel'ova ?
excellent ! "
she felt the quality of the material .
" it was a ruble an arshin , i suppose ? "
pierre told her the price .
" too dear ! "
nat'asha remarked . "
how pleased the children will be and mamma too !
only you need not have bought me this , " she added , unable to suppress a smile as she gazed admiringly at a gold comb set with pearls , of a kind then just coming into fashion .
" ad`ele tempted me : she kept on telling me to buy it , " returned pierre .
" when am i to wear it ? " and nat'asha stuck it in her coil of hair . "
when i take little m'asha into society ?
perhaps they will be fashionable again by then .
well , let 's go now . "
and collecting the presents they went first to the nursery and then to the old countess ' rooms .
the countess was sitting with her companion bel'ova , playing grand - patience as usual , when pierre and nat'asha came into the drawing room with parcels under their arms .
the countess was now over sixty , was quite gray , and wore a cap with a frill that surrounded her face .
her face had shriveled , her upper lip had sunk in , and her eyes were dim .
after the deaths of her son and husband in such rapid succession , she felt herself a being accidentally forgotten in this world and left without aim or object for her existence .
she ate , drank , slept , or kept awake , but did not live .
life gave her no new impressions .
she wanted nothing from life but tranquillity , and that tranquillity only death could give her .
but until death came she had to go on living , that is , to use her vital forces .
a peculiarity one sees in very young children and very old people was particularly evident in her .
her life had no external aims - only a need to exercise her various functions and inclinations was apparent .
she did these things not under any external impulse as people in the full vigor of life do , when behind the purpose for which they strive that of exercising their functions remains unnoticed .
she talked only because she physically needed to exercise her tongue and lungs .
she cried as a child does , because her nose had to be cleared , and so on .
what for people in their full vigor is an aim was for her evidently merely a pretext .
thus in the morning - especially if she had eaten anything rich the day before - she felt a need of being angry and would choose as the handiest pretext bel'ova 's deafness .
she would begin to say something to her in a low tone from the other end of the room .
" it seems a little warmer today , my dear , " she would murmur .
and when bel'ova replied : " oh yes , they 've come , " she would mutter angrily : " o lord !
how stupid and deaf she is ! "
another pretext would be her snuff , which would seem too dry or too damp or not rubbed fine enough .
after these fits of irritability her face would grow yellow , and her maids knew by infallible symptoms when bel'ova would again be deaf , the snuff damp , and the countess ' face yellow .
just as she needed to work off her spleen
so she had sometimes to exercise her still - existing faculty of thinking - and the pretext for that was a game of patience .
when she needed to cry , the deceased count would be the pretext .
when she wanted to be agitated , nicholas and his health would be the pretext , and when she felt a need to speak spitefully , the pretext would be countess mary .
the old lady 's condition was understood by the whole household though no one ever spoke of it , and they all made every possible effort to satisfy her needs .
only by a rare glance exchanged with a sad smile between nicholas , pierre , nat'asha , and countess mary was the common understanding of her condition expressed .
memento mori , " said these glances .
only the really heartless , the stupid ones of that household , and the little children failed to understand this and avoided her .
chapter xiii
when pierre and his wife entered the drawing room the countess was in one of her customary states in which she needed the mental exertion of playing patience , and so - though by force of habit
she greeted him with the words she always used when pierre or her son returned after an absence : " high time , my dear , high time !
we were all weary of waiting for you .
well , thank god ! " and received her presents with another customary remark : " it 's not the gift that 's precious , my dear , but that you give it to me , an old woman ...
"-yet
it was evident that she was not pleased by pierre 's arrival at that moment when it diverted her attention from the unfinished game .
she finished her game of patience and only then examined the presents .
the countess had long wished for such a box , but as she did not want to cry just then she glanced indifferently at the portrait and gave her attention chiefly to the box for cards .
" thank you , my dear , you have cheered me up , " said she as she always did . "
but best of all you have brought yourself back - for i never saw anything like it , you ought to give your wife a scolding !
what are we to do with her ?
she is like a mad woman when you are away .
does n't see anything , does n't remember anything , " she went on , repeating her usual phrases . "
look , anna timof'eevna , " she added to her companion , " see what a box for cards my son has brought us ! "
bel'ova admired the presents and was delighted with her dress material .
conversation of this kind , interesting to no one yet unavoidable , continued all through teatime .
all the grown - up members of the family were assembled near the round tea table at which s'onya presided beside the samovar .
the children with their tutors and governesses had had tea and their voices were audible from the next room .
he spoke of what he knew might interest the old lady and that she could understand .
but to the old countess those contemporaries of hers seemed to be the only serious and real society .
nat'asha saw by pierre 's animation that his visit had been interesting and that he had much to tell them but dare not say it before the old countess .
once or twice pierre was carried away and began to speak of these things , but nicholas and nat'asha always brought him back to the health of prince iv'an and countess mary alex'eevna .
" well , and all this idiocy - gossner and tat'awinova ? "
den'isov asked . "
is that weally still going on ? "
" going on ? "
pierre exclaimed .
" why more than ever !
the bible society is the whole government now ! "
" what is that , mon cher ami ? " asked the countess , who had finished her tea and evidently needed a pretext for being angry after her meal .
" what are you saying about the government ?
i do n't understand . "
" arakch'eev and gol'itsyn , " incautiously remarked pierre , " are now the whole government !
and what a government !
they see treason everywhere and are afraid of everything . "
" well , and how is prince alexander to blame ?
he is a most estimable man .
i used to meet him at mary ant'onovna 's , " said the countess in an offended tone ; and still more offended that they all remained silent , she went on : "
nowadays everyone finds fault .
a gospel society !
well , and what harm is there in that ? "
and she rose ( everybody else got up too ) and with a severe expression sailed back to her table in the sitting room .
the melancholy silence that followed was broken by the sounds of the children 's voices and laughter from the next room .
evidently some jolly excitement was going on there .
" finished , finished ! "
little nat'asha 's gleeful yell rose above them all .
pierre exchanged glances with countess mary and nicholas ( nat'asha he never lost sight of ) and smiled happily .
" that 's delightful music ! " said he .
" it means that anna mak'arovna has finished her stocking , " said countess mary .
" oh , i 'll go and see , " said pierre , jumping up .
" you know , " he added , stopping at the door , " why i 'm especially fond of that music ?
it is always the first thing that tells me all is well .
when i was driving here today , the nearer i got to the house the more anxious i grew .
as i entered the anteroom i heard andr'usha 's peals of laughter and that meant that all was well . "
" i know !
i know that feeling , " said nicholas .
" but i must n't go there - those stockings are to be a surprise for me . "
pierre went to the children , and the shouting and laughter grew still louder .
you stand here , and you in my arms - well now !
one , two !
... " said pierre , and a silence followed : " three ! " and a rapturously breathless cry of children 's voices filled the room . "
two , two !
" they shouted .
chapter xiv
soon after this the children came in to say good night .
they kissed everyone , the tutors and governesses made their bows , and they went out .
only young nicholas and his tutor remained .
dessalles whispered to the boy to come downstairs .
" no , monsieur dessalles , i will ask my aunt to let me stay , " replied nicholas bolk'onski also in a whisper .
" ma tante , please let me stay , " said he , going up to his aunt .
his face expressed entreaty , agitation , and ecstasy .
countess mary glanced at him and turned to pierre .
" when you are here he ca n't tear himself away , " she said .
" i will bring him to you directly , monsieur dessalles .
good night ! " said pierre , giving his hand to the swiss tutor , and he turned to young nicholas with a smile .
" you and i have n't seen anything of one another yet ....
how like he is growing , mary ! "
he added , addressing countess mary .
" like my father ? " asked the boy , flushing crimson and looking up at pierre with bright , ecstatic eyes .
pierre nodded , and went on with what he had been saying when the children had interrupted .
countess mary sat down doing woolwork ; nat'asha did not take her eyes off her husband .
nicholas and den'isov rose , asked for their pipes , smoked , went to fetch more tea from s'onya - who sat weary but resolute at the samovar - and questioned pierre .
the conversation turned on the contemporary gossip about those in power , in which most people see the chief interest of home politics .
" one used to have to be a german - now one must dance with tat'awinova and madame kw"udener , and wead ecka'tshausen and the bwethwen .
oh , they should let that fine fellow bonaparte loose - he'd knock all this nonsense out of them !
fancy giving the command of the sem"enov wegiment to a fellow like that schwa'tz !
" he cried .
and so he thought it necessary to take an interest in these things and to question pierre .
the questions put by these two kept the conversation from changing its ordinary character of gossip about the higher government circles .
" what was it about ? " asked nicholas .
" always the same thing , " said pierre , looking round at his listeners .
" everybody sees that things are going so badly that they can not be allowed to go on so and that it is the duty of all decent men to counteract it as far as they can . "
" what can decent men do ? "
nicholas inquired , frowning slightly . "
what can be done ? "
" why , this ... "
" come into my study , " said nicholas .
nat'asha , who had long expected to be fetched to nurse her baby , now heard the nurse calling her and went to the nursery .
countess mary followed her .
the men went into the study and little nicholas bolk'onski followed them unnoticed by his uncle and sat down at the writing table in a shady corner by the window .
" well , what would you do ? " asked den'isov .
" always some fantastic schemes , " said nicholas .
he has abandoned himself altogether to this mysticism " ( pierre could not tolerate mysticism in anyone now ) . "
he seeks only for peace , and only these people sans foi ni loi
* can give it him - people who recklessly hack at and strangle everything - magn'itski , arakch'eev , and tutti quanti ....
you will agree that if you did not look after your estates yourself but only wanted a quiet life , the harsher your steward was the more readily your object might be attained , " he said to nicholas .
* without faith or law .
" well , what does that lead up to ? " said nicholas .
" well , everything is going to ruin !
robbery in the law courts , in the army nothing but flogging , drilling , and military settlements ; the people are tortured , enlightenment is suppressed .
all that is young and honest is crushed !
everyone sees that this can not go on .
everything is strained to such a degree that it will certainly break , " said pierre ( as those who examine the actions of any government have always said since governments began ) .
" i told them just one thing in petersburg . "
" told whom ? "
" well , you know whom , " said pierre , with a meaning glance from under his brows . "
prince theodore and all those .
to encourage culture and philanthropy is all very well of course .
the aim is excellent but in the present circumstances something else is needed . "
at that moment nicholas noticed the presence of his nephew .
his face darkened and he went up to the boy .
" why are you here ? "
" why ?
let him be , " said pierre , taking nicholas by the arm and continuing .
" that is not enough , i told them .
something else is needed .
when you stand expecting the overstrained string to snap at any moment , when everyone is expecting the inevitable catastrophe , as many as possible must join hands as closely as they can to withstand the general calamity .
everything that is young and strong is being enticed away and depraved .
one is lured by women , another by honors , a third by ambition or money , and they go over to that camp .
no independent men , such as you or i , are left .
what i say is widen the scope of our society , let the mot d'ordre be not virtue alone but independence and action as well ! "
nicholas , who had left his nephew , irritably pushed up an armchair , sat down in it , and listened to pierre , coughing discontentedly and frowning more and more .
" but action with what aim ? " he cried . "
and what position will you adopt toward the government ? "
" why , the position of assistants .
the society need not be secret if the government allows it .
not merely is it not hostile to government , but it is a society of true conservatives - a society of gentlemen in the full meaning of that word .
it is only to prevent some pugach"ev or other from killing my children and yours , and arakch'eev from sending me off to some military settlement .
we join hands only for the public welfare and the general safety . "
" yes , but it 's a secret society and therefore a hostile and harmful one which can only cause harm . "
" why ?
did the tugendbund which saved europe " ( they did not then venture to suggest that russia had saved europe ) " do any harm ?
the tugendbund is an alliance of virtue : it is love , mutual help ...
it is what christ preached on the cross . "
nat'asha , who had come in during the conversation , looked joyfully at her husband .
the boy with the thin neck stretching out from the turn - down collar - whom everyone had forgotten - gazed at pierre with even greater and more rapturous joy .
every word of pierre 's burned into his heart , and with a nervous movement of his fingers he unconsciously broke the sealing wax and quill pens his hands came upon on his uncle 's table .
" it is not at all what you suppose ; but that is what the german tugendbund was , and what i am proposing . "
" no , my fwiend !
the tugendbund is all vewy well for the sausage eaters , but i do n't understand it and ca n't even pwonounce it
, " interposed den'isov in a loud and resolute voice .
" i agwee that evewything here is wotten and howwible , but the tugendbund i do n't understand .
if we 're not satisfied , let us have a bunt of our own .
that 's all wight .
je suis vot'e homme ! "
*
* " i 'm your man . "
pierre maintained the contrary , and as his mental faculties were greater and more resourceful , nicholas felt himself cornered .
this made him still angrier , for he was fully convinced , not by reasoning but by something within him stronger than reason , of the justice of his opinion .
" i will tell you this , " he said , rising and trying with nervously twitching fingers to prop up his pipe in a corner , but finally abandoning the attempt .
" i ca n't prove it to you .
you say that everything here is rotten and that an overthrow is coming : i do n't see it .
i know it is my duty to obey the government .
and if arakch'eev ordered me to lead a squadron against you and cut you down , i should not hesitate an instant , but should do it . '
and you may argue about that as you like ! "
an awkward silence followed these words .
nat'asha was the first to speak , defending her husband and attacking her brother .
her defense was weak and inapt but she attained her object .
the conversation was resumed , and no longer in the unpleasantly hostile tone of nicholas ' last remark .
when they all got up to go in to supper , little nicholas bolk'onski went up to pierre , pale and with shining , radiant eyes .
" uncle pierre , you ...
no ...
if papa were alive ... would he agree with you ?
" he asked .
he had , however , to give him an answer .
" yes , i think so , " he said reluctantly , and left the study .
the lad looked down and seemed now for the first time to notice what he had done to the things on the table .
he flushed and went up to nicholas .
" uncle , forgive me , i did that ... unintentionally , " he said , pointing to the broken sealing wax and pens .
nicholas started angrily .
" all right , all right , " he said , throwing the bits under the table .
and evidently suppressing his vexation with difficulty , he turned away from the boy .
" you ought not to have been here at all , " he said .
chapter xv
the conversation at supper was not about politics or societies , but turned on the subject nicholas liked best - recollections of 1812 .
den'isov started these and pierre was particularly agreeable and amusing about them .
the family separated on the most friendly terms .
" what are you writing , mary ? " nicholas asked .
countess mary blushed .
she was afraid that what she was writing would not be understood or approved by her husband .
she had wanted to conceal what she was writing from him , but at the same time was glad he had surprised her at it and that she would now have to tell him .
" a diary , nicholas , " she replied , handing him a blue exercise book filled with her firm , bold writing .
" a diary ? "
nicholas repeated with a shade of irony , and he took up the book .
it was in french .
december 4 .
today when andr'usha ( her eldest boy ) woke up he did not wish to dress and mademoiselle louise sent for me .
he was naughty and obstinate .
i tried threats , but he only grew angrier .
then i took the matter in hand : i left him alone and began with nurse 's help to get the other children up , telling him that i did not love him .
for a long time he was silent , as if astonished , then he jumped out of bed , ran to me in his shirt , and sobbed so that i could not calm him for a long time .
it was plain that what troubled him most was that he had grieved me .
afterwards in the evening when i gave him his ticket , he again began crying piteously and kissing me .
one can do anything with him by tenderness .
" what is a ' ticket ' ? " nicholas inquired .
" i have begun giving the elder ones marks every evening , showing how they have behaved . "
nicholas looked into the radiant eyes that were gazing at him , and continued to turn over the pages and read .
in the diary was set down everything in the children 's lives that seemed noteworthy to their mother as showing their characters or suggesting general reflections on educational methods .
they were for the most part quite insignificant trifles , but did not seem so to the mother or to the father either , now that he read this diary about his children for the first time .
under the date " 5 " was entered :
m'itya was naughty at table .
papa said he was to have no pudding .
he had none , but looked so unhappily and greedily at the others while they were eating !
i think that punishment by depriving children of sweets only develops their greediness .
must tell nicholas this .
nicholas put down the book and looked at his wife .
the radiant eyes gazed at him questioningly : would he approve or disapprove of her diary ?
there could be no doubt not only of his approval but also of his admiration for his wife .
perhaps it need not be done so pedantically , thought nicholas , or even done at all , but this untiring , continual spiritual effort of which the sole aim was the children 's moral welfare delighted him .
" i quite , quite approve , my dearest ! " said he with a significant look , and after a short pause he added : " and i behaved badly today .
you were n't in the study .
we began disputing - pierre and i - and i lost my temper .
but he is impossible : such a child !
i do n't know what would become of him if nat'asha did n't keep him in hand ....
have you any idea why he went to petersburg ?
they have formed ... "
" yes , i know , " said countess mary .
" nat'asha told me . "
i am sorry you were n't there .
they all fell on me - den'isov and nat'asha
... nat'asha is absurd .
how she rules over him !
and yet there need only be a discussion
and she has no words of her own but only repeats his sayings ... " added nicholas , yielding to that irresistible inclination which tempts us to judge those nearest and dearest to us .
he forgot that what he was saying about nat'asha could have been applied word for word to himself in relation to his wife .
" yes , i have noticed that , " said countess mary .
" when i told him that duty and the oath were above everything , he started proving goodness knows what !
a pity you were not there - what would you have said ? "
" as i see it you were quite right , and i told nat'asha so .
pierre says everybody is suffering , tortured , and being corrupted , and that it is our duty to help our neighbor .
" yes , that 's it !
that 's just what i said to him , " put in nicholas , who fancied he really had said it . "
but they insisted on their own view : love of one 's neighbor and christianity - and all this in the presence of young nicholas , who had gone into my study and broke all my things . "
" ah , nicholas , do you know i am often troubled about little nicholas , " said countess mary .
" he is such an exceptional boy .
i am afraid i neglect him in favor of my own : we all have children and relations while he has no one .
he is constantly alone with his thoughts . "
" well , i do n't think you need reproach yourself on his account .
all that the fondest mother could do for her son you have done and are doing for him , and of course i am glad of it .
he is a fine lad , a fine lad !
this evening he listened to pierre in a sort of trance , and fancy - as we were going in to supper
i looked and he had broken everything on my table to bits , and he told me of it himself at once !
i never knew him to tell an untruth .
a fine lad , a fine lad ! " repeated nicholas , who at heart was not fond of nicholas bolk'onski but was always anxious to recognize that he was a fine lad .
" still , i am not the same as his own mother , " said countess mary .
" i feel i am not the same and it troubles me .
a wonderful boy , but i am dreadfully afraid for him .
it would be good for him to have companions . "
" well it wo n't be for long .
next summer i 'll take him to petersburg , " said nicholas .
" yes , pierre always was a dreamer and always will be , " he continued , returning to the talk in the study which had evidently disturbed him . "
well , what business is it of mine what goes on there - whether arakch'eev is bad , and all that ?
what business was it of mine when i married and was so deep in debt that i was threatened with prison , and had a mother who could not see or understand it ?
and then there are you and the children and our affairs .
is it for my own pleasure that i am at the farm or in the office from morning to night ?
no ,
but i know i must work to comfort my mother , to repay you , and not to leave the children such beggars as i was . "
countess mary wanted to tell him that man does not live by bread alone and that he attached too much importance to these matters .
but she knew she must not say this and that it would be useless to do so .
she only took his hand and kissed it .
he took this as a sign of approval and a confirmation of his thoughts , and after a few minutes ' reflection continued to think aloud .
" you know , mary , today elias mitrof'anych " ( this was his overseer ) " came back from the tamb'ov estate and told me they are already offering eighty thousand rubles for the forest . "
and with an eager face nicholas began to speak of the possibility of repurchasing otr'adnoe before long , and added : " another ten years of life and i shall leave the children ... in an excellent position . "
countess mary listened to her husband and understood all that he told her .
she knew that when he thought aloud in this way he would sometimes ask her what he had been saying , and be vexed if he noticed that she had been thinking about something else .
but she had to force herself to attend , for what he was saying did not interest her at all .
she looked at him and did not think , but felt , about something different .
she felt a submissive tender love for this man who would never understand all that she understood , and this seemed to make her love for him still stronger and added a touch of passionate tenderness .
besides this feeling which absorbed her altogether and hindered her from following the details of her husband 's plans , thoughts that had no connection with what he was saying flitted through her mind .
she thought of her nephew .
she did not compare them with him , but compared her feeling for them with her feeling for him , and felt with regret that there was something lacking in her feeling for young nicholas .
countess mary 's soul always strove toward the infinite , the eternal , and the absolute , and could therefore never be at peace .
a stern expression of the lofty , secret suffering of a soul burdened by the body appeared on her face .
nicholas gazed at her . "
o god !
what will become of us if she dies , as i always fear when her face is like that ?
" thought he , and placing himself before the icon he began to say his evening prayers .
chapter xvi
nat'asha was so used to this kind of talk with her husband that for her it was the surest sign of something being wrong between them if pierre followed a line of logical reasoning .
when he began proving anything , or talking argumentatively and calmly and she , led on by his example , began to do the same , she knew that they were on the verge of a quarrel .
you wo n't escape!"-from that moment this conversation began , contrary to all the laws of logic and contrary to them because quite different subjects were talked about at one and the same time .
this simultaneous discussion of many topics did not prevent a clear understanding but on the contrary was the surest sign that they fully understood one another .
pierre , answering nat'asha 's words , told her how intolerable it had been for him to meet ladies at dinners and balls in petersburg .
" i have quite lost the knack of talking to ladies , " he said .
" it was simply dull .
besides , i was very busy . "
nat'asha looked intently at him and went on :
" mary is so splendid , " she said .
" how she understands children !
it is as if she saw straight into their souls .
yesterday , for instance , m'itya was naughty ... "
" how like his father he is , " pierre interjected .
nat'asha knew why he mentioned m'itya 's likeness to nicholas : the recollection of his dispute with his brother - in - law was unpleasant and he wanted to know what nat'asha thought of it .
" nicholas has the weakness of never agreeing with anything not generally accepted .
but i understand that you value what opens up a fresh line , " said she , repeating words pierre had once uttered .
" no , the chief point is that to nicholas ideas and discussions are an amusement - almost a pastime , " said pierre .
" you know how much i ... " he began to soften down what he had said ; but nat'asha interrupted him to show that this was unnecessary .
" so you say ideas are an amusement to him .... "
" yes , and for me nothing else is serious .
all the time in petersburg i saw everyone as in a dream .
when i am taken up by a thought , all else is mere amusement . "
" ah , i 'm so sorry i was n't there when you met the children , " said nat'asha .
" which was most delighted ?
lisa , i 'm sure . "
" yes , " pierre replied , and went on with what was in his mind . "
nicholas says we ought not to think .
but i ca n't help it .
besides , when i was in petersburg i felt ( i can say this to you ) that the whole affair would go to pieces without me - everyone was pulling his own way .
but i succeeded in uniting them all ; and then my idea is so clear and simple .
you see , i do n't say that we ought to oppose this and that .
we may be mistaken .
what i say is : ' join hands , you who love the right , and let there be but one banner - that of active virtue . '
prince serg'ey is a fine fellow and clever . "
nat'asha would have had no doubt as to the greatness of pierre 's idea , but one thing disconcerted her . "
can a man so important and necessary to society be also my husband ?
how did this happen ?
" she wished to express this doubt to him . "
now who could decide whether he is really cleverer than all the others ?
" she asked herself , and passed in review all those whom pierre most respected .
judging by what he had said there was no one he had respected so highly as plat'on karat'aev .
" do you know what i am thinking about ? " she asked . "
about plat'on karat'aev .
would he have approved of you now , do you think ? "
pierre was not at all surprised at this question .
he understood his wife 's line of thought .
" plat'on karat'aev ? " he repeated , and pondered , evidently sincerely trying to imagine karat'aev 's opinion on the subject . "
he would not have understood ... yet perhaps he would . "
" i love you awfully ! " nat'asha suddenly said .
" awfully , awfully ! "
" no , he would not have approved , " said pierre , after reflection .
" what he would have approved of is our family life .
he was always so anxious to find seemliness , happiness , and peace in everything , and i should have been proud to let him see us .
there now - you talk of my absence , but you would n't believe what a special feeling i have for you after a separation .... "
" yes , i should think ... " nat'asha began .
" no , it 's not that .
i never leave off loving you .
and one could n't love more , but this is something special ....
yes , of course- " he did not finish because their eyes meeting said the rest .
" what nonsense it is , " nat'asha suddenly exclaimed , " about honeymoons , and that the greatest happiness is at first !
on the contrary , now is the best of all .
if only you did not go away !
do you remember how we quarreled ?
and it was always my fault .
always mine .
and what we quarreled about - i do n't even remember ! "
" always about the same thing , " said pierre with a smile . "
jealo ... "
" do n't say it !
i ca n't bear it ! "
nat'asha cried , and her eyes glittered coldly and vindictively . "
did you see her ?
" she added , after a pause .
" no , and if i had i should n't have recognized her . "
they were silent for a while .
" oh , do you know ?
while you were talking in the study i was looking at you , " nat'asha began , evidently anxious to disperse the cloud that had come over them .
" you are as like him as two peas - like the boy . "
( she meant her little son . )
" oh , it 's time to go to him ....
the milk 's come ....
but i 'm sorry to leave you . "
they were silent for a few seconds .
then suddenly turning to one another at the same time they both began to speak .
pierre began with self - satisfaction and enthusiasm , nat'asha with a quiet , happy smile .
having interrupted one another they both stopped to let the other continue .
" no . what did you say ?
go on , go on . "
" no , you go on , i was talking nonsense , " said nat'asha .
pierre finished what he had begun .
it was the sequel to his complacent reflections on his success in petersburg .
at that moment it seemed to him that he was chosen to give a new direction to the whole of russian society and to the whole world .
" i only wished to say that ideas that have great results are always simple ones .
my whole idea is that if vicious people are united and constitute a power , then honest folk must do the same .
now that 's simple enough . "
" yes . "
" and what were you going to say ? "
" i ?
only nonsense . "
" but all the same ? "
" oh nothing , only a trifle , " said nat'asha , smiling still more brightly . "
i only wanted to tell you about p'etya : today nurse was coming to take him from me , and he laughed , shut his eyes , and clung to me .
i 'm sure he thought he was hiding .
awfully sweet !
there , now he 's crying .
well , good - by ! "
and she left the room .
meanwhile downstairs in young nicholas bolk'onski 's bedroom a little lamp was burning as usual .
( the boy was afraid of the dark and they could not cure him of it . )
dessalles slept propped up on four pillows and his roman nose emitted sounds of rhythmic snoring .
little nicholas , who had just waked up in a cold perspiration , sat up in bed and gazed before him with wide - open eyes .
he had awaked from a terrible dream .
he had dreamed that he and uncle pierre , wearing helmets such as were depicted in his plutarch , were leading a huge army .
the army was made up of white slanting lines that filled the air like the cobwebs that float about in autumn and which dessalles called les fils de la vi`erge .
in front was glory , which was similar to those threads but rather thicker .
he and pierre were borne along lightly and joyously , nearer and nearer to their goal .
suddenly the threads that moved them began to slacken and become entangled and it grew difficult to move .
and uncle nicholas stood before them in a stern and threatening attitude .
" have you done this ? "
he said , pointing to some broken sealing wax and pens .
" i loved you , but i have orders from arakch'eev and will kill the first of you who moves forward . "
little nicholas turned to look at pierre but pierre was no longer there .
his father caressed and pitied him .
but uncle nicholas came nearer and nearer to them .
terror seized young nicholas and he awoke .
" my father ! " he thought .
( though there were two good portraits of prince andrew in the house , nicholas never imagined him in human form . )
" my father has been with me and caressed me .
he approved of me and of uncle pierre .
whatever he may tell me , i will do it .
mucius scaevola burned his hand .
why should not the same sort of thing happen to me ?
i know they want me to learn .
and i will learn .
but someday i shall have finished learning , and then i will do something .
i only pray god that something may happen to me such as happened to plutarch 's men , and i will act as they did .
i will do better .
everyone shall know me , love me , and be delighted with me ! "
and suddenly his bosom heaved with sobs and he began to cry .
" are you ill ? "
he heard dessalles ' voice asking .
" no , " answered nicholas , and lay back on his pillow .
" he is good and kind and i am fond of him ! " he thought of dessalles . "
but uncle pierre !
oh , what a wonderful man he is !
and my father ?
oh , father , father !
yes , i will do something with which even he would be satisfied .... "
second epilogue
chapter i
history is the life of nations and of humanity .
to seize and put into words , to describe directly the life of humanity or even of a single nation , appears impossible .
the ancient historians all employed one and the same method to describe and seize the apparently elusive - the life of a people .
they described the activity of individuals who ruled the people , and regarded the activity of those men as representing the activity of the whole nation .
the question : how did individuals make nations act as they wished and by what was the will of these individuals themselves guided ?
the ancients met by recognizing a divinity which subjected the nations to the will of a chosen man , and guided the will of that chosen man so as to accomplish ends that were predestined .
for the ancients these questions were solved by a belief in the direct participation of the deity in human affairs .
modern history , in theory , rejects both these principles .
but modern history has not done this .
having in theory rejected the view held by the ancients , it still follows them in practice .
at the basis of the works of all the modern historians from gibbon to buckle , despite their seeming disagreements and the apparent novelty of their outlooks , lie those two old , unavoidable assumptions .
in 1789 a ferment arises in paris ; it grows , spreads , and is expressed by a movement of peoples from west to east .
several times it moves eastward and collides with a countermovement from the east westward .
the counter movement reaches the starting point of the first movement in the west - paris - and subsides .
what does all this mean ?
why did it happen ?
what made those people burn houses and slay their fellow men ?
what were the causes of these events ?
what force made men act so ?
these are the instinctive , plain , and most legitimate questions humanity asks itself when it encounters the monuments and tradition of that period .
for a reply to these questions the common sense of mankind turns to the science of history , whose aim is to enable nations and humanity to know themselves .
one might believe or disbelieve in the divine significance of napoleon , but for anyone believing in it there would have been nothing unintelligible in the history of that period , nor would there have been any contradictions .
but modern history can not give that reply .
science does not admit the conception of the ancients as to the direct participation of the deity in human affairs , and therefore history ought to give other answers .
modern history replying to these questions says : you want to know what this movement means , what caused it , and what force produced these events ?
then listen :
" louis xiv was a very proud and self - confident man ; he had such and such mistresses and such and such ministers and he ruled france badly .
his descendants were weak men and they too ruled france badly .
and they had such and such favorites and such and such mistresses .
moreover , certain men wrote some books at that time .
at the end of the eighteenth century there were a couple of dozen men in paris who began to talk about all men being free and equal .
this caused people all over france to begin to slash at and drown one another .
they killed the king and many other people .
at that time there was in france a man of genius - napoleon .
he conquered everybody everywhere - that is , he killed many people because he was a great genius .
and for some reason he went to kill africans , and killed them so well and was so cunning and wise that when he returned to france he ordered everybody to obey him , and they all obeyed him .
having become an emperor he again went out to kill people in italy , austria , and prussia .
and there too he killed a great many .
in russia there was an emperor , alexander , who decided to restore order in europe and therefore fought against napoleon .
in 1807 he suddenly made friends with him , but in 1811 they again quarreled and again began killing many people .
all napoleon 's allies suddenly became his enemies and their forces advanced against the fresh forces he raised .
then louis xviii , who till then had been the laughingstock both of the french and the allies , began to reign .
and napoleon , shedding tears before his old guards , renounced the throne and went into exile .
but the allied monarchs were angry at this and went to fight the french once more .
and they defeated the genius napoleon and , suddenly recognizing him as a brigand , sent him to the island of st. helena .
and the exile , separated from the beloved france so dear to his heart , died a lingering death on that rock and bequeathed his great deeds to posterity .
but in europe a reaction occurred and the sovereigns once again all began to oppress their subjects . "
it would be a mistake to think that this is ironic - a caricature of the historical accounts .
the strangeness and absurdity of these replies arise from the fact that modern history , like a deaf man , answers questions no one has asked .
to this , modern history laboriously replies either that napoleon was a great genius , or that louis xiv was very proud , or that certain writers wrote certain books .
all that may be so and mankind is ready to agree with it , but it is not what was asked .
if instead of a divine power some other force has appeared , it should be explained in what this new force consists , for the whole interest of history lies precisely in that force .
history seems to assume that this force is self - evident and known to everyone .
chapter ii
what force moves the nations ?
biographical historians and historians of separate nations understand this force as a power inherent in heroes and rulers .
in their narration events occur solely by the will of a napoleon , and alexander , or in general of the persons they describe .
the answers given by this kind of historian to the question of what force causes events to happen are satisfactory only as long as there is but one historian to each event .
one historian says that an event was produced by napoleon 's power , another that it was produced by alexander 's , a third that it was due to the power of some other person .
besides this , historians of that kind contradict each other even in their statement as to the force on which the authority of some particular person was based .
thiers , a bonapartist , says that napoleon 's power was based on his virtue and genius .
lanfrey , a republican , says it was based on his trickery and deception of the people .
so the historians of this class , by mutually destroying one another 's positions , destroy the understanding of the force which produces events , and furnish no reply to history 's essential question .
writers of universal history who deal with all the nations seem to recognize how erroneous is the specialist historians ' view of the force which produces events .
they do not recognize it as a power inherent in heroes and rulers , but as the resultant of a multiplicity of variously directed forces .
according to this view the power of historical personages , represented as the product of many forces , can no longer , it would seem , be regarded as a force that itself produces events .
yet in most cases universal historians still employ the conception of power as a force that itself produces events , and treat it as their cause .
in their exposition , an historic character is first the product of his time , and his power only the resultant of various forces , and then his power is itself a force producing events .
the ideas of the revolution and the general temper of the age produced napoleon 's power .
but napoleon 's power suppressed the ideas of the revolution and the general temper of the age .
this curious contradiction is not accidental .
not only does it occur at every step , but the universal historians ' accounts are all made up of a chain of such contradictions .
this contradiction occurs because after entering the field of analysis the universal historians stop halfway .
to find component forces equal to the composite or resultant force , the sum of the components must equal the resultant .
this condition is never observed by the universal historians , and so to explain the resultant forces they are obliged to admit , in addition to the insufficient components , another unexplained force affecting the resultant action .
specialist historians describing the campaign of 1813 or the restoration of the bourbons plainly assert that these events were produced by the will of alexander .
that chateaubriand , madame de sta"el , and others spoke certain words to one another only affected their mutual relations but does not account for the submission of millions .
and therefore to explain how from these relations of theirs the submission of millions of people resulted - that is , how component forces equal to one a gave a resultant equal to a thousand times a -
and that is just what the universal historians do , and consequently they not only contradict the specialist historians but contradict themselves .
they see it in what is called culture - in mental activity .
of the immense number of indications accompanying every vital phenomenon , these historians select the indication of intellectual activity and say that this indication is the cause .
but why intellectual activity is considered by the historians of culture to be the cause or expression of the whole historical movement is hard to understand .
chapter iii
a locomotive is moving .
someone asks : " what moves it ? "
a peasant says the devil moves it .
another man says the locomotive moves because its wheels go round .
a third asserts that the cause of its movement lies in the smoke which the wind carries away .
the peasant is irrefutable .
he has devised a complete explanation .
to refute him someone would have to prove to him that there is no devil , or another peasant would have to explain to him that it is not the devil but a german , who moves the locomotive .
only then , as a result of the contradiction , will they see that they are both wrong .
the only conception that can explain the movement of the locomotive is that of a force commensurate with the movement observed .
the only conception that can explain the movement of the peoples is that of some force commensurate with the whole movement of the peoples .
yet to supply this conception various historians take forces of different kinds , all of which are incommensurate with the movement observed .
and the only such conception known to historians is that of power .
in dealing with humanity 's inquiry , the science of history up to now is like money in circulation - paper money and coin .
the biographies and special national histories are like paper money .
they can be used and can circulate and fulfill their purpose without harm to anyone and even advantageously , as long as no one asks what is the security behind them .
you need only forget to ask how the will of heroes produces events , and such histories as thiers ' will be interesting and instructive and may perhaps even possess a tinge of poetry .
that is , wants to exchange the current paper money for the real gold of actual comprehension .
it may indeed make jingling coin , but will do no more than that .
paper money may deceive the ignorant , but nobody is deceived by tokens of base metal that have no value but merely jingle .
as gold is gold only if it is serviceable not merely for exchange but also for use , so universal historians will be valuable only when they can reply to history 's essential question : what is power ?
the universal historians give contradictory replies to that question , while the historians of culture evade it and answer something quite different .
chapter iv
a return to the first is impossible , the belief has been destroyed ; and so it is essential to explain what is meant by power .
napoleon ordered an army to be raised and go to war .
we are so accustomed to that idea and have become so used to it
that the question : why did six hundred thousand men go to fight when napoleon uttered certain words , seems to us senseless .
he had the power and so what he ordered was done .
this reply is quite satisfactory if we believe that the power was given him by god .
but as soon as we do not admit that , it becomes essential to determine what is this power of one man over others .
and that is how power is understood by the science of jurisprudence , that exchange bank of history which offers to exchange history 's understanding of power for true gold .
power is the collective will of the people transferred , by expressed or tacit consent , to their chosen rulers .
the science of jurisprudence regards the state and power as the ancients regarded fire - namely , as something existing absolutely .
but for history , the state and power are merely phenomena , just as for modern physics fire is not an element but a phenomenon .
if power be the collective will of the people transferred to their ruler , was pugach"ev a representative of the will of the people ?
if not , then why was napoleon i ?
why was napoleon iii a criminal when he was taken prisoner at boulogne , and why , later on , were those criminals whom he arrested ?
do palace revolutions - in which sometimes only two or three people take part - transfer the will of the people to a new ruler ?
in international relations , is the will of the people also transferred to their conqueror ?
was the will of the confederation of the rhine transferred to napoleon in 1806 ?
was the will of the russian people transferred to napoleon in 1809 , when our army in alliance with the french went to fight the austrians ?
to these questions three answers are possible :
and these are the three ways in which the historians do explain the relation of the people to their rulers .
evidently the explanations furnished by these historians being mutually contradictory can only satisfy young children .
but what this program consists in these historians do not say , or if they do they continually contradict one another .
each historian , according to his view of what constitutes a nation 's progress , looks for these conditions in the greatness , wealth , freedom , or enlightenment of citizens of france or some other country .
but not to mention the historians ' contradictions as to the nature of this program - or even admitting that some one general program of these conditions exists - the facts of history almost always contradict that theory .
to this question historians reply that louis xiv 's activity , contrary to the program , reacted on louis xvi .
but why did it not react on louis xiv or on louis xv - why should it react just on louis xvi ?
and what is the time limit for such reactions ?
to these questions there are and can be no answers .
and so these historians also see and admit historical events which are exceptions to the theory .
historians of the third class assume that the will of the people is transferred to historic personages conditionally , but that the conditions are unknown to us .
they say that historical personages have power only because they fulfill the will of the people which has been delegated to them .
but in that case , if the force that moves nations lies not in the historic leaders but in the nations themselves , what significance have those leaders ?
the leaders , these historians tell us , express the will of the people : the activity of the leaders represents the activity of the people .
but in that case the question arises whether all the activity of the leaders serves as an expression of the people 's will or only some part of it .
met by this difficulty historians of that class devise some most obscure , impalpable , and general abstraction which can cover all conceivable occurrences , and declare this abstraction to be the aim of humanity 's movement .
the most usual generalizations adopted by almost all the historians are : freedom , equality , enlightenment , progress , civilization , and culture .
history proves this at every turn .
is the movement of the russian people eastward to kaz'an and siberia expressed by details of the morbid character of iv'an the terrible and by his correspondence with k'urbski ?
is the movement of the peoples at the time of the crusades explained by the life and activity of the godfreys and the louis - es and their ladies ?
for us that movement of the peoples from west to east , without leaders , with a crowd of vagrants , and with peter the hermit , remains incomprehensible .
and yet more incomprehensible is the cessation of that movement when a rational and sacred aim for the crusade - the deliverance of jerusalem - had been clearly defined by historic leaders .
popes , kings , and knights incited the peoples to free the holy land ; but the people did not go , for the unknown cause which had previously impelled them to go no longer existed .
the history of the godfreys and the minnesingers can evidently not cover the life of the peoples .
and the history of the godfreys and the minnesingers has remained the history of godfreys and minnesingers , but the history of the life of the peoples and their impulses has remained unknown .
still less does the history of authors and reformers explain to us the life of the peoples .
the history of culture explains to us the impulses and conditions of life and thought of a writer or a reformer .
if we unite both these kinds of history , as is done by the newest historians , we shall have the history of monarchs and writers , but not the history of the life of the peoples .
chapter v
the life of the nations is not contained in the lives of a few men , for the connection between those men and the nations has not been found .
the theory that this connection is based on the transference of the collective will of a people to certain historical personages is an hypothesis unconfirmed by the experience of history .
the theory seems irrefutable just because the act of transference of the people 's will can not be verified , for it never occurred .
whatever happens and whoever may stand at the head of affairs , the theory can always say that such and such a person took the lead because the collective will was transferred to him .
" the herd goes in that direction because the animal in front leads it and the collective will of all the other animals is vested in that leader . "
this is what historians of the first class say - those who assume the unconditional transference of the people 's will .
so say the third class of historians who regard all historical persons , from monarchs to journalists , as the expression of their age .
the theory of the transference of the will of the people to historic persons is merely a paraphrase - a restatement of the question in other words .
what causes historical events ?
power .
what is power ?
power is the collective will of the people transferred to one person .
under what condition is the will of the people delegated to one person ?
on condition that that person expresses the will of the whole people .
that is , power is power : in other words , power is a word the meaning of which we do not understand .
but to understand phenomena man has , besides abstract reasoning , experience by which he verifies his reflections .
and experience tells us that power is not merely a word but an actually existing phenomenon .
not to speak of the fact that no description of the collective activity of men can do without the conception of power , the existence of power is proved both by history and by observing contemporary events .
whenever an event occurs a man appears or men appear , by whose will the event seems to have taken place .
napoleon iii issues a decree and the french go to mexico .
the king of prussia and bismarck issue decrees and an army enters bohemia .
napoleon i issues a decree and an army enters russia .
alexander i gives a command and the french submit to the bourbons .
experience shows us that whatever event occurs it is always related to the will of one or of several men who have decreed it .
without admitting divine intervention in the affairs of humanity we can not regard " power " as the cause of events .
power , from the standpoint of experience , is merely the relation that exists between the expression of someone 's will and the execution of that will by others .
to explain the conditions of that relationship we must first establish a conception of the expression of will , referring it to man and not to the deity .
chapter vi
reinstating the first condition omitted , that of time , we see that no command can be executed without some preceding order having been given rendering the execution of the last command possible .
when , for instance , we say that napoleon ordered armies to go to war , we combine in one simultaneous expression a whole series of consecutive commands dependent one on another .
napoleon could not have commanded an invasion of russia and never did so .
for an order to be certainly executed , it is necessary that a man should order what can be executed .
every order executed is always one of an immense number unexecuted .
all the impossible orders inconsistent with the course of events remain unexecuted .
only the possible ones get linked up with a consecutive series of commands corresponding to a series of events , and are executed .
we say that napoleon wished to invade russia and invaded it .
in reality in all napoleon 's activity we never find anything resembling an expression of that wish , but find a series of orders , or expressions of his will , very variously and indefinitely directed .
so that examining the relation in time of the commands to the events , we find that a command can never be the cause of the event , but that a certain definite dependence exists between the two .
this relation of the commander to those he commands is just what is called power .
this relation consists in the following :
for common action people always unite in certain combinations , in which regardless of the difference of the aims set for the common action , the relation between those taking part in it is always the same .
of all the combinations in which men unite for collective action one of the most striking and definite examples is an army .
the soldiers , of whom there are the most , form the lower section of the cone and its base .
the soldier himself does the stabbing , hacking , burning , and pillaging , and always receives orders for these actions from men above him ; he himself never gives an order .
the noncommissioned officers ( of whom there are fewer ) perform the action itself less frequently than the soldiers , but they already give commands .
an officer still less often acts directly himself , but commands still more frequently .
a general does nothing but command the troops , indicates the objective , and hardly ever uses a weapon himself .
the commander in chief never takes direct part in the action itself , but only gives general orders concerning the movement of the mass of the troops .
a similar relation of people to one another is seen in every combination of men for common activity - in agriculture , trade , and every administration .
this relation of the men who command to those they command is what constitutes the essence of the conception called power .
having restored the condition of time under which all events occur , we find that a command is executed only when it is related to a corresponding series of events .
chapter vii
when one of the opinions expressed is fulfilled , that opinion gets connected with the event as a command preceding it .
men are hauling a log .
each of them expresses his opinion as to how and where to haul it .
they haul the log away , and it happens that this is done as one of them said .
he ordered it .
there we have command and power in their primary form .
when a man works alone he always has a certain set of reflections which as it seems to him directed his past activity , justify his present activity , and guide him in planning his future actions .
just the same is done by a concourse of people , allowing those who do not take a direct part in the activity to devise considerations , justifications , and surmises concerning their collective activity .
for reasons known or unknown to us the french began to drown and kill one another .
and corresponding to the event its justification appears in people 's belief that this was necessary for the welfare of france , for liberty , and for equality .
people ceased to kill one another , and this event was accompanied by its justification in the necessity for a centralization of power , resistance to europe , and so on .
men went from the west to the east killing their fellow men , and the event was accompanied by phrases about the glory of france , the baseness of england , and so on .
but these justifications have a very necessary significance in their own day .
these justifications release those who produce the events from moral responsibility .
these temporary aims are like the broom fixed in front of a locomotive to clear the snow from the rails in front : they clear men 's moral responsibilities from their path .
without such justification there would be no reply to the simplest question that presents itself when examining each historical event .
how is it that millions of men commit collective crimes - make war , commit murder , and so on ?
with the present complex forms of political and social life in europe can any event that is not prescribed , decreed , or ordered by monarchs , ministers , parliaments , or newspapers be imagined ?
is there any collective action which can not find its justification in political unity , in patriotism , in the balance of power , or in civilization ?
so that every event that occurs inevitably coincides with some expressed wish and , receiving a justification , presents itself as the result of the will of one man or of several men .
in whatever direction a ship moves , the flow of the waves it cuts will always be noticeable ahead of it .
to those on board the ship the movement of those waves will be the only perceptible motion .
when the ship moves in one direction there is one and the same wave ahead of it , when it turns frequently the wave ahead of it also turns frequently .
but wherever it may turn there always will be the wave anticipating its movement .
whatever happens it always appears that just that event was foreseen and decreed .
examining only those expressions of the will of historical persons which , as commands , were related to events , historians have assumed that the events depended on those commands .
but examining the events themselves and the connection in which the historical persons stood to the people , we have found that they and their orders were dependent on events .
arriving at this conclusion we can reply directly and positively to these two essential questions of history :
( 1 ) what is power ?
( 2 ) what force produces the movement of the nations ?
morally the wielder of power appears to cause the event ; physically it is those who submit to the power .
but as the moral activity is inconceivable without the physical , the cause of the event is neither in the one nor in the other but in the union of the two .
or in other words , the conception of a cause is inapplicable to the phenomena we are examining .
in the last analysis we reach the circle of infinity - that final limit to which in every domain of thought man 's reason arrives if it is not playing with the subject .
electricity produces heat , heat produces electricity .
atoms attract each other and atoms repel one another .
the same applies to historical events .
why war and revolution occur we do not know .
chapter viii
if history dealt only with external phenomena , the establishment of this simple and obvious law would suffice and we should have finished our argument .
but the law of history relates to man .
the presence of the problem of man 's free will , though unexpressed , is felt at every step of history .
all seriously thinking historians have involuntarily encountered this question .
all the contradictions and obscurities of history and the false path historical science has followed are due solely to the lack of a solution of that question .
if the will of every man were free , that is , if each man could act as he pleased , all history would be a series of disconnected incidents .
if there be a single law governing the actions of men , free will can not exist , for then man 's will is subject to that law .
in this contradiction lies the problem of free will , which from most ancient times has occupied the best human minds and from most ancient times has been presented in its whole tremendous significance .
but regarding him from within ourselves as what we are conscious of , we feel ourselves to be free .
this consciousness is a source of self - cognition quite apart from and independent of reason .
through his reason man observes himself , but only through consciousness does he know himself .
apart from consciousness of self no observation or application of reason is conceivable .
to understand , observe , and draw conclusions , man must first of all be conscious of himself as living .
a man is only conscious of himself as a living being by the fact that he wills , that is , is conscious of his volition .
but his will - which forms the essence of his life - man recognizes ( and can but recognize ) as free .
if , observing himself , man sees that his will is always directed by one and the same law ( whether he observes the necessity of taking food , using his brain , or anything else )
he can not recognize this never - varying direction of his will otherwise than as a limitation of it .
were it not free it could not be limited .
a man 's will seems to him to be limited just because he is not conscious of it except as free .
you say : i am not free .
but i have lifted my hand and let it fall .
everyone understands that this illogical reply is an irrefutable demonstration of freedom .
that reply is the expression of a consciousness that is not subject to reason .
if the consciousness of freedom were not a separate and independent source of self - consciousness it would be subject to reasoning and to experience , but in fact such subjection does not exist and is inconceivable .
having learned from experiment and argument that a stone falls downwards , a man indubitably believes this and always expects the law that he has learned to be fulfilled .
but learning just as certainly that his will is subject to laws , he does not and can not believe this .
he could not live , because all man 's efforts , all his impulses to life , are only efforts to increase freedom .
a man having no freedom can not be conceived of except as deprived of life .
man is the creation of an all - powerful , all - good , and all - seeing god .
what is sin , the conception of which arises from the consciousness of man 's freedom ?
that is a question for theology .
the actions of men are subject to general immutable laws expressed in statistics .
what is man 's responsibility to society , the conception of which results from the conception of freedom ?
that is a question for jurisprudence .
man 's actions proceed from his innate character and the motives acting upon him .
what is conscience and the perception of right and wrong in actions that follows from the consciousness of freedom ?
that is a question for ethics .
man in connection with the general life of humanity appears subject to laws which determine that life .
but the same man apart from that connection appears to be free .
how should the past life of nations and of humanity be regarded - as the result of the free , or as the result of the constrained , activity of man ?
that is a question for history .
they do not see that the role of the natural sciences in this matter is merely to serve as an instrument for the illumination of one side of it .
chapter ix
in regard to this question , history stands to the other sciences as experimental science stands to abstract science .
the subject for history is not man 's will itself but our presentation of it .
and so for history , the insoluble mystery presented by the incompatibility of free will and inevitability does not exist as it does for theology , ethics , and philosophy .
history surveys a presentation of man 's life in which the union of these two contradictions has already taken place .
in actual life each historic event , each human action , is very clearly and definitely understood without any sense of contradiction , although each event presents itself as partly free and partly compulsory .
to solve the question of how freedom and necessity are combined and what constitutes the essence of these two conceptions , the philosophy of history can and should follow a path contrary to that taken by other sciences .
whatever presentation of the activity of many men or of an individual we may consider , we always regard it as the result partly of man 's free will and partly of the law of inevitability .
the degree of freedom and inevitability governing the actions of these people is clearly defined for us .
our conception of the degree of freedom often varies according to differences in the point of view from which we regard the event , but every human action appears to us as a certain combination of freedom and inevitability .
in every action we examine we see a certain measure of freedom and a certain measure of inevitability .
and always the more freedom we see in any action the less inevitability do we perceive , and the more inevitability the less freedom .
the proportion of freedom to inevitability decreases and increases according to the point of view from which the action is regarded , but their relation is always one of inverse proportion .
in all these cases the conception of freedom is increased or diminished and the conception of compulsion is correspondingly decreased or increased , according to the point of view from which the action is regarded .
so that the greater the conception of necessity the smaller the conception of freedom and vice versa .
religion , the common sense of mankind , the science of jurisprudence , and history itself understand alike this relation between necessity and freedom .
all cases without exception in which our conception of freedom and necessity is increased and diminished depend on three considerations :
( 1 ) the relation to the external world of the man who commits the deeds .
( 2 ) his relation to time .
( 3 ) his relation to the causes leading to the action .
if we consider a man alone , apart from his relation to everything around him , each action of his seems to us free .
and the more we perceive of these influences the more our conception of his freedom diminishes and the more our conception of the necessity that weighs on him increases .
the second consideration is the more or less evident time relation of the man to the world and the clearness of our perception of the place the man 's action occupies in time .
that is the ground which makes the fall of the first man , resulting in the production of the human race , appear evidently less free than a man 's entry into marriage today .
the degree of our conception of freedom or inevitability depends in this respect on the greater or lesser lapse of time between the performance of the action and our judgment of it .
if i examine an act i performed a moment ago in approximately the same circumstances as those i am in now , my action appears to me undoubtedly free .
if i reflect on an action still more remote , ten years ago or more , then the consequences of my action are still plainer to me
and i find it hard to imagine what would have happened had that action not been performed .
the farther i go back in memory , or what is the same thing the farther
i go forward in my judgment , the more doubtful becomes my belief in the freedom of my action .
in history we find a very similar progress of conviction concerning the part played by free will in the general affairs of humanity .
a contemporary event seems to us to be indubitably the doing of all the known participants , but with a more remote event we already see its inevitable results which prevent our considering anything else possible .
and the farther we go back in examining events the less arbitrary do they appear .
the austro - prussian war appears to us undoubtedly the result of the crafty conduct of bismarck , and so on .
the napoleonic wars still seem to us , though already questionably , to be the outcome of their heroes ' will .
in regard to the migration of the peoples it does not enter anyone 's head today to suppose that the renovation of the european world depended on attila 's caprice .
the farther back in history the object of our observation lies , the more doubtful does the free will of those concerned in the event become and the more manifest the law of inevitability .
when we do not at all understand the cause of an action , whether a crime , a good action , or even one that is simply nonmoral , we ascribe a greater amount of freedom to it .
in the case of a crime we most urgently demand the punishment for such an act ; in the case of a virtuous act we rate its merit most highly .
in an indifferent case we recognize in it more individuality , originality , and independence .
that a criminal was reared among malefactors mitigates his fault in our eyes .
the founder of a sect or party , or an inventor , impresses us less when we know how or by what the way was prepared for his activity .
if we examined simple actions and had a vast number of such actions under observation , our conception of their inevitability would be still greater .
the cause prompting the action we can foretell the result .
on these three considerations alone is based the conception of irresponsibility for crimes and the extenuating circumstances admitted by all legislative codes .
chapter x
may be - can we ever conceive either complete freedom or complete necessity .
( 1 ) to whatever degree we may imagine a man to be exempt from the influence of the external world , we never get a conception of freedom in space .
every human action is inevitably conditioned by what surrounds him and by his own body .
i lift my arm and let it fall .
i chose one out of all the possible directions because in it there were fewest obstacles .
for my action to be free it was necessary that it should encounter no obstacles .
to conceive of a man being free we must imagine him outside space , which is evidently impossible .
( 2 ) however much we approximate the time of judgment to the time of the deed , we never get a conception of freedom in time .
for if i examine an action committed a second ago i must still recognize it as not being free , for it is irrevocably linked to the moment at which it was committed .
can i lift my arm ?
i lift it , but ask myself : could i have abstained from lifting my arm at the moment that has already passed ?
to convince myself of this i do not lift it the next moment .
but i am not now abstaining from doing so at the first moment when i asked the question .
time has gone by which i could not detain , the arm i then lifted is no longer the same as the arm
i now refrain from lifting , nor is the air in which i lifted it the same that now surrounds me .
the moment in which the first movement was made is irrevocable , and at that moment i could make only one movement , and whatever movement i made would be the only one .
that i did not lift my arm a moment later does not prove that i could have abstained from lifting it then .
and since i could make only one movement at that single moment of time , it could not have been any other .
to imagine it as free , it is necessary to imagine it in the present , on the boundary between the past and the future - that is , outside time , which is impossible .
( 3 ) however much the difficulty of understanding the causes may be increased , we never reach a conception of complete freedom , that is , an absence of cause .
i raise my arm to perform an action independently of any cause , but my wish to perform an action without a cause is the cause of my action .
in the same way we can never imagine the action of a man quite devoid of freedom and entirely subject to the law of inevitability .
( 1 )
however we may increase our knowledge of the conditions of space in which man is situated , that knowledge can never be complete , for the number of those conditions is as infinite as the infinity of space .
and therefore so long as not all the conditions influencing men are defined , there is no complete inevitability but a certain measure of freedom remains .
( 2 )
( 3 ) however accessible may be the chain of causation of any action , we shall never know the whole chain since it is endless , and so again we never reach absolute inevitability .
and so the conception of the action of a man subject solely to the law of inevitability without any element of freedom is just as impossible as the conception of a man 's completely free action .
to imagine a man perfectly free and not subject to the law of inevitability , we must imagine him all alone , beyond space , beyond time , and free from dependence on cause .
in the first case , if inevitability were possible without freedom we should have reached a definition of inevitability by the laws of inevitability itself , that is , a mere form without content .
we should in fact have reached those two fundamentals of which man 's whole outlook on the universe is constructed - the incomprehensible essence of life , and the laws defining that essence .
reason says : ( 1 ) space with all the forms of matter that give it visibility is infinite , and can not be imagined otherwise .
( 2 ) time is infinite motion without a moment of rest and is unthinkable otherwise .
( 3 )
the connection between cause and effect has no beginning and can have no end .
consciousness says : ( 1 ) i alone am , and all that exists is but me , consequently i include space .
( 2 ) i measure flowing time by the fixed moment of the present in which alone i am conscious of myself as living , consequently i am outside time .
( 3 ) i am beyond cause , for i feel myself to be the cause of every manifestation of my life .
reason gives expression to the laws of inevitability .
consciousness gives expression to the essence of freedom .
freedom not limited by anything is the essence of life , in man 's consciousness .
inevitability without content is man 's reason in its three forms .
freedom is the thing examined .
inevitability is what examines .
freedom is the content .
inevitability is the form .
only by separating the two sources of cognition , related to one another as form to content , do we get the mutually exclusive and separately incomprehensible conceptions of freedom and inevitability .
only by uniting them do we get a clear conception of man 's life .
apart from these two concepts which in their union mutually define one another as form and content , no conception of life is possible .
all that we know of the life of man is merely a certain relation of free will to inevitability , that is , of consciousness to the laws of reason .
all that we know of the external world of nature is only a certain relation of the forces of nature to inevitability , or of the essence of life to the laws of reason .
all knowledge is merely a bringing of this essence of life under the laws of reason .
man 's free will differs from every other force in that man is directly conscious of it , but in the eyes of reason it in no way differs from any other force .
the forces of gravitation , electricity , or chemical affinity are only distinguished from one another in that they are differently defined by reason .
just so the force of man 's free will is distinguished by reason from the other forces of nature only by the definition reason gives it .
in the experimental sciences what we know we call the laws of inevitability , what is unknown to us we call vital force .
vital force is only an expression for the unknown remainder over and above what we know of the essence of life .
so also in history what is known to us
we call laws of inevitability ,
what is unknown we call free will .
free will is for history only an expression for the unknown remainder of what we know about the laws of human life .
chapter xi
that assumption would destroy the possibility of the existence of laws , that is , of any science whatever .
if there is even a single body moving freely , then the laws of kepler and newton are negatived and no conception of the movement of the heavenly bodies any longer exists .
if any single action is due to free will , then not a single historical law can exist , nor any conception of historical events .
the more this field of motion spreads out before our eyes , the more evident are the laws of that movement .
to discover and define those laws is the problem of history .
all human sciences have traveled along that path .
arriving at infinitesimals , mathematics , the most exact of sciences , abandons the process of analysis and enters on the new process of the integration of unknown , infinitely small , quantities .
abandoning the conception of cause , mathematics seeks law , that is , the property common to all unknown , infinitely small , elements .
in another form but along the same path of reflection the other sciences have proceeded .
the same is done by the natural sciences : leaving aside the question of cause , they seek for laws .
history stands on the same path .
chapter xii
from the time the law of copernicus was discovered and proved , the mere recognition of the fact that it was not the sun but the earth that moves sufficed to destroy the whole cosmography of the ancients .
by disproving that law it might have been possible to retain the old conception of the movements of the bodies , but without disproving it , it would seem impossible to continue studying the ptolemaic worlds .
but even after the discovery of the law of copernicus the ptolemaic worlds were still studied for a long time .
by refuting these new laws the former view of history might have been retained ; but without refuting them it would seem impossible to continue studying historic events as the results of man 's free will .
and yet the former history continues to be studied side by side with the laws of statistics , geography , political economy , comparative philology , and geology , which directly contradict its assumptions .
the struggle between the old views and the new was long and stubbornly fought out in physical philosophy .
theology stood on guard for the old views and accused the new of violating revelation .
but when truth conquered , theology established itself just as firmly on the new foundation .
in the one case as in the other , on both sides the struggle provokes passion and stifles truth .
on the one hand there is fear and regret for the loss of the whole edifice constructed through the ages , on the other is the passion for destruction .
to the defenders of the laws of copernicus and newton , to voltaire for example , it seemed that the laws of astronomy destroyed religion , and he utilized the law of gravitation as a weapon against religion .
as in the question of astronomy then , so in the question of history now , the whole difference of opinion is based on the recognition or nonrecognition of something absolute , serving as the measure of visible phenomena .
in astronomy it was the immovability of the earth , in history it is the independence of personality - free will .
